--- protection-of-child-rights-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
~~~~12006-08
REGISTERED NO.DL-(N)O4/000712006-{)8
q~~-
-- ~I em
'(th~ ~~ette t4 ~ia
~~I(UI
EXlRAORDINARY
'IPT II - '§1J61
PART II- Section 1
~1t~
PUBUSHED BY AU1HORITY
\fo4] or{~, ~, ~ 2,2007/~ 12,1928
No.4) NEWDELIDT, UESDAY,JANUARY2,2007/PAUSA1I922,8
~ ~1ff\R~~~\iffiftt~Fi~~~~~1f~Q(TWI
Separate paging isgivento tbisPart inorder tbat it may'befiledas aseparate compilation.
MINISTRY OFLAWAND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New De/hi, the2ndJanuary, 2007/Pausa 12,1928(Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
29thDecember,2006,andisherebypublishedforgeneralinformation:-
THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
(AMENDMEN1) ACT, 2006
No.4 OF2007
[29thDecember,2006.]
AnActtoamendtheCommissionsforProtectionofChildRightsAct,2005.
BEitenactedbyParliamentintheFifty-seventhYearoftheRepublicofIndiaas
follows:-
I. This Act may be called the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights(Amendment) Shorttitle.
Act.,2006.
Amendment
2. In the CommissionsforProtect~onof ChildRightsAct,2005,intheprovisoto
ofsection4
section4,forthewords"Ministerin-chargeoftheMinistryofHwnanResourceDevelopment",
ofAct4of
2006. the words "Minister in-chargeof the Ministryor the Departmentof Womenand Child
Development"shallbesubstituted.
.
K.N.CHAlURVEDI,
Secy.totheGovt.ofIndia.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 1st September, 2022
G.S.R. 678(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 110 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), the Central Government hereby makes the
following amendments to the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement
(1) These rules may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Amendment Rules,
2022.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
rules), in sub-rule (1) of rule 2,–
(i) clause (iv) shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(vi a) “conflict of interest” means “a situation in which a person has a private or personal interest sufficient
to appear to influence the objective exercise of his or her official duties and where such person shall be
ineligible to be associated with any statutory structure defined under the Act.”
(iii) in clause (ix),–
(a) for sub-clause (f), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(f) rescue, restoration and follow up”;
(b) for sub-clause (g), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(g) social mainstreaming and rehabilitation”;
(iv) for clause (xii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(xii) Person-in-charge or Superintendent” means a person appointed for the control and management of the
Child Care Institution”;
(v) in clause (xiv), for the words “designated in every”, the words “designated for every” shall be substituted;
(vi) in clause (xviii),–
(a) for the words “a graduate with minimum seven years of experience in child education and development”,
the words “a graduate with minimum three years of experience in matters relating to child education and
development” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “under the Act or these rules”, the words “under the Act or the rules made thereunder” shall
be substituted;
(c) in Explanation, for the words “this definition, it is clarified that”, the words “this clause, it is hereby
clarified” shall be substituted.
3. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (3) of rule 4, after the words “shall not be less than thirty five years of age”, the
words “and shall not be more than sixty-five years of age on the date of notification” shall be inserted.
4. In the principal rules, in rule 5,–
(i) in sub-rule (2), the words “which shall not be continuous” shall be omitted.
(ii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5) If any complaint is made against a member of the Board, the State Government shall hold necessary inquiry
except in respect of judicial officers; complaints against judicial officers shall be forwarded to the Registrar
of the High Court for action.
(6) The State Government shall complete the inquiry within a period of two months and take appropriate action
within one month.
(7) If a criminal case is registered against the member concerned, if necessary the State Government may
suspend the member immediately pending inquiry, for such term as appropriate; or after holding an inquiry
and giving an opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 75
5. In the principal rules, in rule 6,–
(i) in sub-rule (2), for the words “un-connected with the case remains”, the words “not connected with the case
shall not remain”, shall be substituted.
(ii) after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7A) The Board may conduct its sittings through video conferencing, in case there are constraints limiting
physical movement of the child alleged to be in conflict with law, or the Board Members including the
Chairperson.
Provided if the child’s case requires the presence of a doctor or psychiatrist or counsellor or physical
attention, the sitting shall be conducted in the premises as provided in sub-rule(1) of rule 6.”.
6. In the principal rules, in rule 7,–
(i) in clause (v) of sub-rule (1), for the words “to the District Child Protection Unit”, the words “to the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause (vi) of sub-rule (1), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely: -
“(vi) maintain a suggestion box or grievance redressal box in the premises of the Board or in the Observation
Home or Special Home or Place of Safety at a prominent place to encourage inputs from children and adults
alike which shall be operated by the nominee of the Principal Magistrate.
(vi a) an online grievance redressal system shall also be created by the State Government for receipt of
suggestion or grievance which may be accessed by the Board;”;
(iii) for clause (viii) of sub-rule (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(viii) review the Children's Suggestion or Complaint Book during every visit in the Child Care Institution
and also carry out random one to one and group interaction with children in the Child Care Institutions in
absence of the Child Care Institution staff and Person-in-Charge to understand concerns and issues of
children, to determine their well-being and provide inputs and recommendations accordingly to such Child
Care Institutions.”.
7. In the principal rules, in rule 8,–
(i) after clause (iii) of sub-rule (3), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iii a) also inform the child and the parent or guardian immediately regarding the rights and privileges of the
child under the Act and rules;
(iii b) rights of the child shall also be displayed in every police station and at prominent places in the
Observation Homes, Special Homes, Place of Safety;”.
(ii) in sub-rule (6), the words “and Childline Services” shall be omitted;
8. In the principal rules, in rule 9,–
(i) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The Board shall ensure that the information regarding the child referred to in sub-rule (2) is uploaded on
a portal, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.”.
(ii) in sub-rule (3), for the word and figure “section 83”, the word and figure “section 78 and section 83” shall be
substituted.
9. In the principal rules, in rule 12,–
(i) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The District Magistrate shall on the basis of the quarterly report submitted in sub-rule (2) examine the
reasons for pendency, discrepancies observed during visits to the Observation Homes and the like and shall
make its recommendations to the authorities like Police, Medical, District Legal Services Authority or any
other concerned authority, for reduction of pendency of cases before the Board and to take appropriate action
against the authorities as deemed fit.
(2B) Where the review by the District Magistrate discloses the reasons for pendency due to the members of the
Board, then the District Magistrate shall inform the State Child Protection Society.
(2C) The State Child Protection Society shall on the basis of the report submitted by the District Magistrate
recommend for appropriate action to the State Government.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (3), for the words “the Selection Committee constituted under rule 87 of these rules”, the words “the
Registrar of the High Court and a copy shall also be forwarded to the District Magistrate.” shall be substituted.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
10. In the principal rules, in rule 15,–
(i) for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be substituted namely:–
“(3) The Chairperson and the members shall be above the age of thirty-five years and not more than sixty five
years and shall have a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or sociology or human
health or education or human development or special education for differently abled children and has been
actively involved in health, education or welfare activities pertaining to children for seven years or is a
practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or sociology or
human health or education or human development or special education for differently abled children.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (4), the following proviso shall be inserted namely:–
“Provided that nothing contained in this sub-rule shall be a bar in case of a member being appointed as
Chairperson”;
(iii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4A) The person applying for the post of the Chairperson or member of the Committee shall submit an
affidavit, as per Form 49, certifying that the applicant is not barred by any of the conditions laid down in sub-
section 4A of section 27 of the Act. The appropriate Government shall then verify the same as per norm.
(4B) A person associated with an organisation receiving foreign contribution shall not be eligible to be a
Chairperson or member of the Committee.
(4C) Any person working in the implementation of the Act in any Non-Government Organisation or any
organisation, performing such functions which may cause conflict of interest in discharge of their duties as
the Chairperson or member of the Committee shall not be eligible for appointment as the Chairperson and
member of the Committee.
Explanation: For the removal of doubt, it is hereby clarified that, this may include but is not limited to any of
the following situations within the territorial jurisdiction of the Committee:
(a) any family member is a member of any non-governmental organisation;
(b) close relation is a member of any non-governmental organisation ;
(c) cases of non-governmental organisations or persons working in a district for rescue and
rehabilitation;
(d) a person representing a person who runs a Child Care Institution or member of the Board or Trust of
any non-governmental organisation.
(4D) If any complaint is made against a Chairperson or member of the Committee, the State Government
shall hold an inquiry and if necessary, suspend the person immediately pending inquiry. The inquiry shall be
completed within a period of two months and the State Government may take appropriate action within one
month of completion of the inquiry.
(4E) No Chairperson or member of the Committee shall be removed without holding an inquiry by the State
Government and until that person has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4F) If a criminal case is registered against the Chairperson or member concerned, if necessary the
Government may suspend the concerned Chairperson or member, immediately pending inquiry, for such term
as appropriate, or after holding an inquiry and giving an opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.
11. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (4) of rule 16, for the words “un-connected with the case remains”, the words
“not connected with the case shall not remain”, shall be substituted.
12. In rule 17 of the principal rules,–
(i) after clause (iii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iii a) Quarterly reports of inspection conducted under clause (viii) of section 30 of the Act shall be submitted,
as and when required, for the purpose of monitoring under section 109 of the Act;”;
(ii) for clause (iv), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(iv) review the Children's Suggestion or Complaint Book during every visit in the Child Care Institution and
also carry out random one to one and group interaction with children in the Child Care Institutions in absence
of Child Care Institution staff and Person-in-Charge to understand concerns and issues of children to determine
their well-being and provide inputs and recommendations accordingly to the Child Care Institutions;”;
(iii) after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 77
“(v a) for the purposes of sub-section (4) of section 40 of the Act, the Committee shall submit a quarterly
information in Form 16 regarding restored, dead and runaway children to the State Government and the
District Magistrate;”;
(iv) after clause (vii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(vii a) maintain case records of at least five years.”;
(v) in clause (viii), after the words “a software may be developed by the State Government”, the words “such that
the case records of at least five years are maintained.” shall be inserted;
(vi) after clause (viii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ix) ensure that children without having a legal guardian irrespective of their age are expeditiously declared
legally free for adoption within the timeline as provided in the Act, rules and regulations;
(x) interact with older children living in the Child Care Institutions having no guardians and also with such
children living in the Child Care Institutions who are not in contact with their guardians for several years and
counsel such children about the benefit of family based care including foster care and adoption;
(xi) interact with all concerned both in physical and virtual modes in case of production of the child before
the Committee, while giving instructions to the District Child Protection Unit or Specialised Adoption
Agency or Child Care Institution, as the case may be, and in the process of declaring a child legally free for
adoption.”.
13. In the principal rules, in rule 18,–
(i) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A) In extraordinary situations, when the movement of the Child or the Committee is restricted due to
unforeseen circumstances, the child may be presented before the Committee through virtual mode and the
Committee shall physically interact with the Child at the first opportunity.”;
(ii) after sub-rule (9), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(10) The Committee shall ensure that the information regarding the child referred to in this rule is uploaded on
a portal, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.”.
14. In the principal rules, in rule 19,–
(i) in sub-rule (3), after the words “or Child Welfare Officer”, the words “or designated officer by the District
Child Protection Unit” shall be inserted.
(ii) for sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be substituted, namely: -
“(4) In case of placement of the child in non-institutional care, the Committee shall direct the District Child
Protection Unit concerned to develop an individual care plan in Form 7 and in case of institutional care, shall
direct the management of the Child Care Institution concerned to develop an individual care plan in Form 7,
which includes a rehabilitation plan.
(4A) The individual care plan prepared for every child whether in the institutional care or non-institutional care
shall be developed based on the case history, circumstances and individual needs of the child.
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-rule, the expression non-institutional care does not include
adoption.”;
(iii) after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7A) The Committee, while disposing the case and placing the child in an institution shall ensure that the
institution is a registered Child Care Institution under section 41 of the Act or a fit facility declared under
section 51 of the Act.”;
(iv) in sub-rule (8), after the words “or Child Welfare Officer”, the words “or designated officer by the District
Child Protection Unit” shall be inserted;
(v) after sub-rule (8), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(8A) The District Child Protection Unit after completing the social investigation within fifteen days shall
submit the report to the Child Welfare Committee.”;
(vi) in sub-rule (17), after the words “or Child Welfare Officer of the institution”, the words “or designated officer
by the District Child Protection Unit” shall be inserted.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
15. In the principal rules, in rule 20,–
(i) in sub-rule (3), for the words “the Selection Committee constituted under rule 87 of these rules”, the words “the
State Child Protection Society” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4) Any grievance arising out of the functioning of the Committee may be filed by the affected child or anyone
connected with the child before the District Magistrate, who shall dispose the same within a period of thirty days
by passing appropriate orders.”.
16. In the principal rules, for the rule 21, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“21. Manner of Registration of Child Care Institutions
(1) All institutions running institutional care services for children in need of care and protection or children in
conflict with law, whether run by the Government or voluntary organisation, shall be registered under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the Act, irrespective of being registered or licensed under any other Act for the time
being in force.
(2) All such institutions shall make an application in Form 27 together with a copy each of rules, bye-laws,
memorandum of association, list of governing body, office bearers, list of trustees, balance sheet of preceding
three years, statement of past record of social or public service provided by the institution to the State
Government, Darpan Identification from National Institution for Transforming India Aayog and a declaration
from the person or the organisation regarding any previous conviction record or involvement in any immoral
act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child labour or that it has not been black listed by the State
Government or District Administration;
(3) The State Government shall, after receipt of the application for registration, send the application to the
District Magistrate within fifteen days of receipt of the application to call for recommendations of the District
Magistrate in Form 46A.
(4) The District Magistrate may examine the requests vis-a-vis need in the district within thirty days from the
date of receipt of application from the State Government.
(5) The District Magistrate shall verify credibility, background and previous record of the Child Care
Institution and the agency or individual promoting the institution and make specific recommendations to the
State Government for consideration.
(6) The following shall be considered by the District Magistrate while making recommendations, namely:–
(i) registration of the organisation under any law for the time being in force;
(ii) details of physical infrastructure, water and electricity facilities, sanitation and hygiene, recreation
facilities and nutrition plan;
(iii) financial position of the organisation and maintenance of documents along with audited statement of
accounts for the previous three years;
(iv) resolution of the Governing Body to run the institution or an open shelter;
(v) plan of action for providing services for children such as medical, vocational, educational, counselling,
and the like, in case of new applicants and details of such services provided in case of existing
institutions ;
(vi) arrangements of safety, security, transportation and support and access for differently-abled children;
(vii) details of other support services run by the organisation;
(viii) the institution is near a school within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed under
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009);
(ix) details of linkages and networking with other governmental, non-governmental, corporate and other
community based agencies on providing need-based services to the children;
(x) details of existing staff with their qualification and experience;
(xi) details of registration under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010) and funds
available, if any;
(xii) a declaration from the person or the organisation regarding any previous conviction record or
involvement in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child labour;
(xiii) any other criteria as prescribed by the State Government.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 79
(xiv) while making the recommendation, the District Magistrate shall assess the actual requirement of
additional institutions, keeping in mind the occupancy levels of the existing institutions and the capacity
of authorities under section 54 of the Act so that they can ensure compliance of the Child Care
Institutions with provisions of the Act; and
(xv) certify to the effect that the relevant provisions of the Act and rules have been complied with.
(7) The State Government shall after verifying that provisions exist in the institution for the care and
protection of children, health, education, boarding and lodging facilities, vocational facilities and rehabilitation
as per the Act and the rules, and taking into account the requirements of the district and recommendation from
the District Magistrate about the applicant institution, may issue a registration certification to such institution
under sub- section (1) of section 41 of the Act in Form 28.
(8) The State Government, while taking a decision on the application for registration, shall consider the
following namely:–
(i) recommendations of the District Magistrate;
(ii) confirm that all the eligibility conditions as per the Act are met with;
(iii) any other criteria as prescribed by the Centre or the State Government has also been followed.
(9) The State Government, shall not grant provisional registration where adequate facilities do not exist in the
institution applying for registration and the State Government shall issue an order before the expiry of one
month from the date of receipt of the application that the institution is not entitled for even provisional
registration.
(10) The District Magistrate shall conduct a detailed annual inspection of all the institutions in the district
which have been registered under the Act and such inspection shall be carried out in the format as provided
under Form 46.
(11) If the inspection or the annual review reveals that there is unsatisfactory compliance with the standards of
care, protection, rehabilitation and reintegration services and management of the institution as laid down under
the Act and the rules or the facilities are inadequate, the State Government shall, at any time, serve notice on
the management of the institution and after giving an opportunity of being heard, declare within a period of
sixty days from the date of the detailed inspection or annual review as the case may be, that the registration of
the institution or organisation, shall stand withdrawn or cancelled from a date specified in the notice and from
the said date, the institution shall cease to be an institution registered under sub-section (1) of section 41of the
Act.
(12) When an institution ceases to be an institution registered under the Act or has failed to apply for
registration within the time frame laid down in the said provision or has not been granted provisional
registration, the said institution shall be managed by the State Government or the children placed therein shall
be transferred by the order of the Board or the Committee, to some other institution, registered under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the Act.
(13) All institutions shall be bound to seek renewal of registration three months prior to the expiry of the period
of registration and in case of their failure to seek renewal of registration before the expiry of the period of
registration of the institution, the institution shall cease to be an institution registered under sub- section (1) of
section 41 of the Act and provisions of sub-rule (8) of this rule shall apply.
(14) An application for renewal of registration of an institution shall be disposed of within sixty days from the
date of receipt of application.
(15) The decision on renewal of registration shall be based on the annual inspection done by the District
Magistrate under Form 46A in the year in which renewal is sought.
(16) The Central Government shall facilitate developing a model online system for receipt and processing of
applications and grant or cancellation of registration, and in the interim the systems existing in the States and
Union territories shall continue.”.
17. In the principal rules, after rule 21, the following rule shall be inserted namely:–
“21A Manner of registration of Group Foster Care.–
(1) Every Group Foster Care shall be registered under the Act in a manner as prescribed under these rules.
(2) All such Foster Families willing to undertake children under Group Foster Care shall make an application to
the State Government. At the time of application, the Foster Family shall also make declaration under Form 50

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
regarding any previous conviction record or involvement in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or
employment of child labour or that it has not been black listed by the State Government.
(3) The appropriate Government shall then verify the declaration form of the Foster Family and if found
otherwise by the State Government, the Foster Family shall be liable for punitive action and immediate
disqualification.
(4) Within a month of receipt of application for registration of Group Foster Care, the application shall be
referred to the concerned District Magistrate by the State Government, for conducting inspection of the Group
Foster Care and sending its recommendations.
(5) The District Magistrate shall conduct inspection and send its recommendation as per Form 47 within thirty
days from the date of receipt of call of recommendation from the State Government.
(6) The District Magistrate while making its recommendations for registration of Group Foster Care shall
examine that the Group Foster Care has the following facilities, namely:–
(a) provide adequate food, clothing and shelter and education;
(b) provide care, support and treatment for child’s overall physical, emotional and mental health;
(c) ensure protection from exploitation, maltreatment, harm, neglect and abuse;
(d) provide age appropriate facilities for recreation, extra-curricular activities such as sports, music, dance,
drama, art, and the like;
(e) provide vocational training according to the interests of the child;
(f) mandatory police verification of the individuals;
(g) income tax returns of the individuals for the past three years;
(7) After considering the recommendations of the District Magistrate and verifying that provisions exist in the
facility for the care and protection of children, health, education, boarding and lodging facilities, vocational
facilities, the State Government may issue a registration certificate in Form 48.
(8) The District Magistrate shall conduct a detailed inspection to review annually after registration of the
institution as per Form 47.
(9) As mandated under section 44 of the Act, the Child Welfare Committee shall conduct monthly inspection of
Group Foster Care as per Form 47.
(10) The inspection reports of the District Magistrate, the Inspection Committees, and the Child Welfare
Committees shall be shared with the District Child Protection Unit within a period of fifteen days of inspection
for taking corrective action.
(11) Wherever the District Magistrate or the Inspection Committees or the Child Welfare Committee finds the
Group Foster Care to be in violation of the provisions of the Act and these rules, the District Magistrate or the
Committee shall recommend cancellation of registration of the facility to the State Government and forthwith
shift the children from the facility by following due process.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, cancellation of registration shall be for a term not less than five years.”.
18. In the principal rules, in rule 23,–
(i) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A) while placing the child in foster care, the State Government shall ensure the following in order of
preference, namely: -
(i) child is placed in a similar social cultural milieu;
(ii) first preference shall be given to the extended family of the child, which does not include child’s
biological or adoptive parents;
Provided that any of the immediate or extended family members are not the alleged accused/perpetrators
of abuse on the child.
(iii) second Preference shall be given to an unrelated family known to the child.
(iv) third Preference shall be given to an unrelated foster family.
(v) fourth Preference shall be given to Group Foster Care.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (3), after the words “shall be taken by the Committee”, the words “within a period of three
months.” shall be inserted;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 81
(iii) after sub-rule (9), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(9A) The District Child Protection Unit shall submit the Home Study Report of the Prospective Foster Care
Family to the Committee within thirty days from the day of reference. ”;
(iv) for sub-rule (11), the following sub rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(11) The number of children placed under foster care shall not exceed two children at any given point of time
(with the exception of siblings) excluding biological children of the foster family and the number of children
under group foster care shall not exceed eight children including biological children of the foster caregiver at
any given point of time.”;
(v) for sub-rule (13), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(13) The District Child Protection Unit, while selecting Group foster care setting shall consider the following
illustrative criteria, namely:-
(i) the Group Foster Care setting shall be registered under rule 21A of these rules and the inspections of the
Group Foster Care setting shall be conducted as per provisions laid under these rules;
(ii) the Group Foster Care setting having registration under rule 21A of these rules shall follow the norms
and standards as given under the Act and these rules and the norms and standards as laid down under
these Rules shall be applicable as per children placed in Group Foster Care, which is a maximum number
of eight children including biological children of the foster caregiver;
(iii) existence of child protection policy;
(iv) sufficient space and proper amenities for children;
(v) any facility housing more than eight children including biological children in Group foster care shall be
registered as a Child Care Institution; and
(vi) medical reports of all the members of the Group Foster Caregivers residing in the premises shall be
obtained including reports for Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Tuberculosis and Hepatitis B and the like
to determine that they are medically fit.”.
(vi) for sub-rule (14), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(14) The Central Government shall issue Model Guidelines for non-institutional care including Foster Care
and Group foster care, based on which the process for selection of Foster Care and Group foster care setting
shall be notified by the State Government.”.
(vii) after sub-rule (19), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(20) The foster family or group foster care shall be black listed from the foster care programme and shall also
not be eligible to adopt a child under the Act:
(i) if the foster family or persons in group foster care are convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude,
and such conviction has not been reversed or has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;
(ii) if a complaint, of child abuse or violation of human rights or child rights, registered against the foster
family or persons in group foster care has been proven by the State Government, based on an inquiry.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, a blacklisted foster family or group foster family shall not be eligible
to apply for foster care.”.
19. In the principal rules, in rule 24,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), for clause (iii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(iii) community or organisation sponsorship;”;
(ii) in sub-rule (1), after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(vi) sponsorship through institutions, companies or corporations either public or private;
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, sponsorship shall be prioritised for providing support to families
for the purpose of restoration of the child to the family or relative or guardian.”;
(iii) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) The District Magistrate shall draw up a sponsorship plan for the district in consultation with the
stakeholders, generate resources by way of public and private contributions and ensure that the vulnerable
children in the district are supported either partially or fully, as per their requirement. ”;
(iv) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The District Child Protection Unit shall prepare a panel of persons or families or organisations interested
in sponsoring a child.”;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(v) after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rules shall be substituted, namely:–
“(4) The District Child Protection Unit shall forward the panel to the Board or the Committee or the Children’s
Court, for passing appropriate order for placement of the child under sponsorship in Form 36.
(5) The District Child Protection Unit, in case of individual sponsorship, shall open an account in the name of
the child to be operated preferably by the mother and the money shall be transferred directly from the bank
account of the District Child Protection Unit to the bank account of the child.
(6) The duration of sponsorship should be as per the Individual Care Plan of the child, which may cover a
period up to the age of eighteen years and may also be extended to the aftercare program of the child.”.
(vi) after sub- rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7) The procedure for sponsorship through institutions, organisations, companies or corporations either public
or private shall be as specified by the State Government.”
20. In the principal rules, in rule 25,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), for the words “The State Government shall”, the words “The State Government through the
District Magistrate shall” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rules shall be inserted namely:–
“(2A) The District Magistrate may facilitate scholarships for higher education; loan for education or starting
small business for children leaving the Child Care Institutions and convergence with the Government schemes
or private entrepreneurs may be explored for the purpose.
(2B) The District Magistrate may facilitate campus placements and apprenticeship assignments in
collaboration with the local businesses and industry, subject to the condition that such business or industry or
agency is found suitable for engaging with the children and prescribes to the Child Protection Policy as
mandated under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2020.
(2C) The District Magistrate may maintain oversight on such arrangements with the help of the Police and
other stakeholders to ensure that the interest of children are not compromised in any manner.”.
21. In the principal rules, in rule 27,–
(i) in sub-rule (8), for the words “shall be sent to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit and District
Child Protection Unit”, the words “shall be sent to the District Magistrate, the District Child Protection Unit,
the Children’s Court and the Special Juvenile Police Unit” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-rule (9), for the words “the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit, the District Child Protection
Unit and the State Child Protection Society.” the words “the District Magistrate, the District Child Protection
Unit, the Children’s Court, the Special Juvenile Police Unit and the State Child Protection Society” shall be
substituted;
(iii) in sub-rule (10), the words “(viii) group foster care” shall be omitted.
22. In the principal rules, in rule 28,–
(i) in sub-rule (5), for the words “shall be sent to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit and District
Child Protection Unit”, the words “shall be sent to the District Magistrate, the District Child Protection Unit,
the Children’s Court and Special Juvenile Police Unit” shall be substituted.;
(ii) in sub-rule (6), for the words “be sent to the Special Juvenile Police Unit, the District Child Protection Unit and
the State Child Protection Society.” the words “be sent to the District Magistrate, District Child Protection
Unit, Special Juvenile Police Unit and the State Child Protection Society” shall be substituted.
23. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (8) of rule 33, after sub-clause (g) of clause (iv), the following sub-clause shall
be inserted, namely:-
“(h) Birthday of any of the children in the Child Care Institution.”.
24. In the principal rules, in rule 34, –
(i) in sub-rule (3), after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(v a) periodic medical health screening of each child to be conducted with the help of the nearest Government
healthcare facilities; ”;
(ii) in sub-rule (3), in clause (xii), after the words “to an appropriate centre administered by qualified persons”, the
words “or running under any Government Scheme of the Ministry or Department” shall be inserted;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 83
(iii) in sub-rule (6), for the words “The State Government through the District Child Protection Unit of the
District”, the words “The District Magistrate through the Chief or District Medical Officer” shall be
substituted;
(iv) after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) The State Government may be approached in the event of inadequate facilities in the District and the
concerned State Government shall make necessary arrangements in all such cases.”.
25. In the principal rules, in rule 35,–
(i) in sub-rule (2), for the words “shall participate in facilitating”, the words “shall be provided necessary training
or capacity building so as to facilitate” shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (4), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“The facilities available under the concerned mental health programme at State or District Level under the
Ministry or Department of Health shall be utilized for providing facilities for mental health to the children.”.
26. In the principal rules, in rule 37,–
(i) in sub-rule (4), after the words “shall be submitted to”, the words “the District Magistrate,” shall be inserted;
(ii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5) The District Magistrate may ensure convergence with existing Central or State Government programmes
for skilling and vocational training of the children.
(6) Every child aged fourteen and above living in a Child Care Institution or under non-institutional care may
be given the option of skill development and vocational training.”.
27. In the principal rules, in rule 39, after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) The District Child Protection Unit shall compile the recommendations of the Management Committees
and suggestions of the children received from the Suggestion Box from all Child Care Institutions in the
Districts on a monthly basis, action taken on the same and submit a detailed report to the District Magistrate.”.
28. In the principal rules, in rule 41,–
(i) for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(1) The State Government shall constitute the State level inspection committee and the District Magistrate
shall constitute district level inspection committees.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (6), for the words “shall forward the same to the State Child Protection Society or the District Child
Protection Unit”, the words “shall forward the same to the District Magistrate and the State Child Protection
Society” shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) The Inspection report of the State Inspection Committee shall be forwarded to the District Magistrate
within a period of two weeks of the visit.”;
(iv) after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7A) Appropriate action shall be taken within a month by the District Magistrate and a compliance report for
the same shall be submitted to the State Child Protection Society, in two months period.”;
(v) for sub-rule (8), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely: –
“(8) The District Inspection Committee shall comprise of the following members, namely:–
(i) Additional District Magistrate- Chairperson;
(ii) Member of the Board or the Committee;
(iii) District Child Protection Officer as the Member Secretary;
(iv) one Medical Officer nominated by the Chief or District Medical Officer of the district;
(v) one member of the civil society working in the area of child rights, care, protection and welfare, who is
not a part of the management or organisation or has any pecuniary interest in such organisation of any
Child Care Institution
(vi) one mental health expert who has experience of working with children; and
(vii) any other person of repute from society not having conflict of interest, deemed appropriate by the
District Magistrate.”

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(vi) in sub-rule (11), for the words “to the District Child Protection Unit”, the words “to the District Magistrate”
shall be substituted;
(vii) for sub-rule (13), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(13) The District Magistrate shall take necessary action on the report of the District Inspection Committee and
ensure corrective measures are taken in a time bound manner.”
(viii) after sub-rule (13), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(14) The District Magistrate shall submit a report on the Child Care Institutions functioning in the District
and measures taken for their improvement once every year to the State Government.”.
29. In the principal rules, in rule 43,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), after the words “and cases pending for decision to the Authority online”, the words “on a
monthly basis” shall be inserted;
(ii) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2) The information to be provided in sub-rule (1) shall also be provided to the District Magistrate in Form
16A.
(3) The District Magistrate after review of the report submitted by the Child Welfare Committee in Form
16A shall take necessary measures to expedite the process of adoption of children declared legally free for
adoption.”.
30. In the principal rules, in rule 44, in sub-rule (1),–
(i) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
“(ii) Every child who does not get a family either in in-country adoption or in inter-country adoption and is
placed under the hard to place category, shall be eligible to be placed in foster care, by the Committee on the
recommendation of the District Child Protection Unit or the Specialised Adoption Agency. ”;
(ii) clauses (iii) and (iv) shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause (v),–
(a) for the words “a minimum of five years”, the words “a minimum of two years” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “after registering in Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System”, the
words “after registering in the portal of the Authority” shall be substituted.
31. In the principal rules, in rule 45,–
(i) for the marginal heading, “Procedure before the Court”, the marginal heading, “Procedure before the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(1) The procedure for obtaining an Adoption Order from the District Magistrate or the Additional District
Magistrate (authorized by the District Magistrate), as the case may be, shall be such as provided in Adoption
Regulations.”;
(iii) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) The District Magistrate, for the purpose of an application for adoption order, shall follow the procedure
as laid down in the Act and the Adoption Regulations.”;
(iv) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(3) All the cases pertaining to adoption matters pending before the Court shall stand transferred to the
District Magistrate from the date of commencement of these rules.”.
32. In the principal rules, in rule 46,–
(i) for sub-rule (1) the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(1) The District Magistrate or the Additional District Magistrate (authorised by the District Magistrate), as the
case may be, shall dispose of an application for making an adoption order within a period of two months from
the date of filing of the application, as provided under sub-section (2) of section 61 of the Act.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (2), for the words “No information or Court order”, the words “No information or Adoption order
issued by the District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
33. In the principal rules, in rule 49, in sub-rule (1),–

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 85
(i) in clause (vii), after the words “guidance to State Adoption Resource Agencies,”, the words “the District
Magistrate,” shall be inserted.
(ii) in clause (viii), for the words “State Governments and the State Adoption Resource Agencies,”, the words
“State Governments, the State Adoption Resource Agencies and the District Magistrate,” shall be substituted.
(iii) in clause (ix), in sub-clause (b), the words “and child care institutions” shall be omitted.
(iv) for clause (xi) the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
“(xi) maintain a comprehensive centralised database and portal relating to children and prospective adoptive
parents for the purpose of adoption;”.
34. In the principal rules, in rule 50,–
(i) in sub-rule (4), in clause (ii), for the words “the Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance
System”, the words “the centralised database and portal relating to children and prospective adoptive parents
for the purpose of adoption;” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-rule (8), for the words “from the National Legal Services Authority.”, the words “from the Department
of Legal Affairs and the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice.” shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-rule (15), for the words, letters and figures, “sitting fee of Rs.1,000/- per sitting,” the words “sitting
fee of not less than Rupees Two Thousand per sitting,” shall be substituted.
35. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (2) of rule 51, after the words “may also be convened”, the words “by video
conference, through web or” shall be inserted.
36. In the principal rules, in rule 54,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), the words “childline services” shall be omitted;
(ii) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5A) The State Government shall take appropriate action on the recommendations of the Committee or the Board,
as the case may be.
(5B) The District Child Protection Unit shall ensure transfer of children at the earliest, under intimation to the State
Government.”.
37. In the principal rules, after sub-rule (3) of rule 55, the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4) Relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force
shall be applicable for offences under section 75 of the Act.”.
38. In the principal rules, after rule 55, the following rule shall be inserted, namely: –
“55A – Procedure in case of offence under section 76 of the Act–
(1) Whenever a child is found to be employed or used for the purposes of begging, an immediate investigation
shall be undertaken by the Police in such cases and where an offence is made out under section 76 of the Act, a
First Information Report shall be registered forthwith.
(2) In case where the parents have engaged their children in begging, then an investigation shall be undertaken
under section 76 of the Act prior to filing of First Information Report.
(3) In case the child engaged in begging is found to be a victim of trafficking then provisions of the Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) and section 370 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), which are
cognizable offences, shall also be applicable.
(4) In case the child engaged in child begging is found to be a victim of child labour then provisions of the Child
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (61 of 1986), which are cognizable offences,
shall also be applicable.
(5) In case the child engaged in begging, is also found to be kidnapped for the purposes of begging then
offences under sections 359 to 369 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), which is a cognizable offence shall
also be applicable.”.
39. In the principal rules, after rule 57, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:-
“57A – Procedure in case of offence under section 79 of the Act–
(1) Whenever a child is found to be employed as a child labour, an immediate investigation shall be undertaken
by the Police in such cases and where an offence is made out under section 79 of the Act, a First Information
Report shall be registered forthwith.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) In case the child is found to be a victim of child labour then provisions of the Child and Adolescent Labour
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (61 of 1986), which are cognizable offences, shall also be applicable.
(3) In case the child engaged as child labour is found be a victim of trafficking then provisions of the Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) and section 370 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), which are
cognizable offences, shall also be applicable.”.
40. In the principal rules, in rule 59,–
(i) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely :–
“(5A) The Committee shall submit a report regarding such children and action taken regarding their
rehabilitation to the District Magistrate. The District Magistrate shall ensure action regarding shifting of
children to a safe place and closure of the Institution within seven days and recommend cancellation of
registration of the agency to the State Government.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (6),–
(a) for the words “The Committee shall recommend” the words “The District Magistrate shall recommend”
shall be substituted;
(b) after the words “shall also be withdrawn.”, the words “and the State Government shall take appropriate
action within fifteen days.” shall be inserted;
(iii) after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7) In case the child that is sold and is also trafficked, then the provisions of the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) and section 370 of the Indian Penal Code, 1960 (45 of 1860) shall also
be applicable.”.
41. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (9) of rule 60, for the words “the State Government”, the words “the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted.
42. In the principal rules, in rule 61, after clause (xxxii) of sub-rule (3), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely,–
“(xxxiii) check the Children’s Suggestion or Complaint Book daily and inform the District Child Protection
Unit and the Committee or the Board promptly about urgent complaints.
(xxxiv) maintain a record of complaints received in the Children’s Suggestion or Complaint Book and actions
taken thereto”.
43. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (2) of rule 68, in clause (v), after the words “the State Government”, the words
“or the District Magistrate” shall be inserted.
44. In the principal rules, in rule 69, under sub-heading K, after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted,
namely:–
“(3) The children shall be educated about their rights and the Child Care Institution may encourage the children
and indulge them in education, sports and other extra-curricular activities.”.
45. In the principal rules, in rule 73, in clause (xxi) of sub- rule (3), the words “social investigation report, order of
the Committee, linkage with schemes” shall be inserted in the beginning.
46. In the principal rules, in rule 75, in sub- rule (1)–
(i) in clause (ii), after the words “Board or Committee”, the words “and the District Magistrate, National or
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (iii), after the words “Board or Committee”, the words “and the District Magistrate, the National or
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause (iv), after the words “report the matter to the police”, the words “and the District Magistrate,
National or State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
47. In the principal rules, in rule 76, after clause (ii) of sub- rule (2), the following sub- clause shall be inserted,
namely:–
“(iia) in the event a case of sexual abuse is reported, procedure under section 19 of the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012), shall be followed”;
48. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (1) of rule 77, in the Table, against the serial number 6, in column (2), for the
entry, “Children’s Suggestion Book”, the entry “Children’s Suggestion or Complaint Book” shall be substituted.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 87
49. In the principal rules, in rule 79,–
(i) in sub- rule (8), the word “girl” shall be omitted, and after the words “Where a child”, the words, “under
eighteen years of age” shall be inserted.
(ii) after sub- rule (8), the following sub- rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(9) Where a girl, above eighteen years of age, is released from the Child Care Institution and has no place to
go, she shall be provided with accomodation in the Working Women Hostels, or other such government
facilities, till the time some other suitable arrangement is made by her.”
50. In the principal rules, in rule 81,–
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “Transfer of Child”, the words “Transfer or Repatriation of Child”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(5) Where the child is a national of another country, on the production of the child before the Board or the
Committee, the Board or the Committee shall inform the District Magistrate who shall initiate the process for
repatriation of the child immediately through the appropriate Department of the State Government and in
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs, as the case may be.”;
(iii) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5A) The District Magistrate shall prepare a list of children to be repatriated and furnish the same to the
Monitoring Authority (National Commission for Protection of Child Rights or State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be) as per the protocols.
(5B) The Monitoring Authority shall follow up with the concerned Government or Private Agencies for
getting the child repatriated.
(5C) The Monitoring Authority shall then submit a status report of the children who are to be repatriated to
the Central Government and the State Government, as the case may be on a quarterly basis.”.
51. In the principal rules, for rule 82, the following rules shall be substituted, namely:–
“82A. Restoration and Follow-up for children in conflict with law–
(1) The Board or the Children’s Court may make an order in Form 44 for the release of the child placed in a Child
Care Institution after hearing the child and his parents or guardian, and after satisfying itself as to the identity of the
persons claiming to be the parents or the guardian.
(2) While passing an order for restoration of the child, the Board or the Children’s Court shall take into account the
reports of the Probation Officer Worker or the designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or non-
governmental organisation, including report of a home visit prepared on the direction of the Board or the Children’s
Court in appropriate cases, and any other relevant document or report brought before the Board or the Children’s
Court.
(3) When a child expresses his unwillingness to be restored back to the family, the Board or the Children’s Court
shall interact with the child to find out the reasons for the same and record the same and the child shall not be
coerced or persuaded to go back to the family.
(4) The child would also not be restored back to the family where the parents or guardians refuse to accept the child
back and in all such cases, the Board or the Children’s Court shall provide alternative means for rehabilitation.
(5) The child may not be restored back to the family where the social investigation report prepared by the Probation
officer or designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or the Child Welfare Officer or the non-
governmental organisation establishes that restoration to family may not be in the interest of the child.
(6) The order of restoration shall include an individual care plan prepared by the Probation Officer or the
designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or the non-governmental organisation.
(7) The Board or the Children’s Court, while directing restoration of the child, may pass order for an escort in Form
45, where necessary.
(8) Besides police, the Board may seek collaboration with the District Child Protection Unit to accompany the child
back to the family for restoration.
(9) In case of girls, the child shall necessarily be accompanied by female escorts.
(10) The copy of the restoration order along with a copy of the order for escort shall be forwarded by the Board or
the Children’s Court to the District Child Protection Unit which shall provide funds for the restoration of the child,
including travel and other incidental expenses.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(11) A follow-up plan shall be prepared as part of the individual care plan by the Child Welfare Officer or the Case
Worker or the social worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(12) The follow-up report shall state the situation of the child post restoration and the measures necessary in order
to reduce further vulnerability of the child.
82B. Restoration and Follow-up for children in need of care and protection-
(1) The Committee may make an order in Form 44 for the release of the child placed in a Child Care Institution
after hearing the child and his parents or guardian, and after satisfying itself as to the identity of the persons
claiming to be the parents or the guardian.
(2) While passing an order for restoration of the child, the Committee shall take into account the reports of the
social worker or Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker or designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or
non-governmental organisation, including report of a home visit prepared on the direction of the Committee in
appropriate cases, and any other relevant document or report brought before the Committee.
(3) When a child expresses his unwillingness to be restored back to the family, the Committee shall interact with
the child to find out the reasons for the same and record the same and the child shall not be coerced or persuaded to
go back to the family.
(4) Where the child refuses to go back to the family or the family refuses to take back the child due to reasons of
financial constraints, the District Magistrate shall explore all possibilities of providing all Central and State
sponsored schemes including sponsorship under section 45 of the Act, Juvenile Justice Fund under section 105 of
the Act, Corporate Social Responsibility funds or any other scheme to strengthen the family financially in the best
interest of the child.
Explanation: For the purpose of this sub-rule, financial capability of the family may be ascertained through any
income documents such as bank statement of past one year or Income Tax returns of the past three years or
property registration of the family or income certificate, whichever is available.
(5) The child would also not be restored back to the family where the parents or guardians refuse to accept the child
back and in all such cases, the Committee may provide alternative means for rehabilitation.
(6) The child may not be restored back to the family where the social investigation report prepared by the Child
Welfare Officer or the social worker or the Case Worker or the non-governmental organisation or designated
officer by the District Child Protection Unit or management of Child Care Institution, as the case may be,
establishes that restoration to family may not be in the interest of the child.
(7) The District Child Protection Unit shall submit the report regarding restoration plan for eligible children and its
implementation and the District Magistrate may facilitate restoration of children and intervene wherever required.
(8) The order of restoration shall include an individual care plan prepared by the social worker or the Child Welfare
Officer or the Case Worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(9) The Committee, while directing restoration of the child, may pass an order for an escort in Form 45, where
necessary.
(10) Besides police, the Committee may seek collaboration with the District Child Protection Unit to accompany
the child back to the family for restoration.
(11) In case of girls, the child shall necessarily be accompanied by female escorts.
(12) The copy of the restoration order along with a copy of the order for escort shall be forwarded by the
Committee to the District Child Protection Unit which shall provide funds for the restoration of the child, including
travel and other incidental expenses.
(13) Where the child has not been declared legally free for adoption, all efforts must be made to restore the child
with their guardian or relatives, if they are deemed to be fit by the Committee.
(14) The District Magistrate shall explore all possibilities to provide benefit under all Central and State sponsored
schemes including Sponsorship under section 45 of the Act and the Juvenile Justice Fund under section 105 of the
Act.
(15) A follow-up plan shall be prepared as part of the individual care plan by the Child Welfare Officer or the Case
Worker or the social worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(16) The follow-up report shall state the situation of the child post restoration and the measures necessary in order
to reduce further vulnerability of the child.”
52. In the principal rules, after sub-rule (6) of rule 83, the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 89
“(7) The District Magistrate may submit proposal to the State for seeking funds from the State Juvenile Justice
Fund for implementing projects for children in the District regarding any of the activities mentioned under this
rule.”
53. In the principal rules, in sub rule (1) of rule 84,–
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “The State Child Protection Society”, the words “shall only comprise
of the officials from the State Government and” shall be inserted.
(ii) in clause (iv) for the words “received from various District Child Protection Units” the words “received from
various District Magistrates” shall be substituted.
54. In the principal rules, after rule 84, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:-
“84A. State Adoption Resource Agency–
(1) The State Government shall set up a State Adoption Resource Agency for dealing with adoptions and related
matters in the State under the guidance of the Authority, as per the provisions of section 67 of the Act and the
Adoption Regulations.
(2) The Governing Body of the State Adoption Resource Agency shall be headed by the Principal Secretary or
the Secretary of the Department of the State Government.
(3) The Director of the Department of the State Government dealing with adoption shall be the Member
Secretary and Chief Executive Officer of the State Adoption Resource Agency.”.
55. In the principal rules, in rule 85,–
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely:-
“District Magistrate and District Child Protection Unit”;
(ii) in sub-rule (1),–
(a) for the opening portion, the following shall be substituted, namely:–
“The District Child Protection Unit shall function under the supervision of the District Magistrate and
shall perform following functions, namely:”;
(b) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted:–
“(ii a) make the social investigation report and the individual care plan for each child as directed by the
Board or the Committee.”;
(c) In clause (xxiii), after the words “the State Child Protection Society” the words “and the District
Magistrate” shall be inserted.;
(d) after clause (xxvii), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:–
“(xxviii) maintain a panel of social workers for assigning the work to be done by social workers under
the Act;
(xxix) ensure that rights of the child are displayed in schools, hospitals, government buildings and other
such places which are frequented by children.”.
(iii) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) The District Magistrate shall be the Nodal Officer in the district for the implementation of the Act and
the rules, and may designate any Additional District Magistrate of the District to discharge the duties under
the Act.”;
(iv) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(3) The District Magistrate shall hold quarterly review meetings with relevant stakeholders including the
Police Department, the Education Department, the Health Department, the District Legal Services Authority,
to discuss issues related to children in the district.”.
56. In the principal rules, in rule 88,–
(i) in sub-rule (6), the words “or Committee as the case may be” shall be omitted;
(ii) sub-rules (14) to (16) shall be omitted.
57. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (4) of rule 89, after the words “The State Government”, the words “or the District
Administration” shall be inserted.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
58. In the principal rules, in rule 91, in sub-rule (1), after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ia) inspect the Child Care Institutions including the Specialised Adoption Agencies and maintain a record
of inspections conducted by the authorities".
59. In the principal rules, in rule 92,–
(i) in clause (xi) of sub-rule(4), the words “childline services” shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-rule (7), for the word “develop”, the word “issue” shall be substituted.
60. In the principal rules, for the Form 7, the following Form shall be substituted, namely: –
“FORM 7
[Rules 11(3), 13(7)(vi), 13(8)(ii), 19(4), 19(17), 62(6)(vii), 62(6)(x) and 69 I (3)]
INDIVIDUAL CARE PLAN
Child in Conflict with Law or Child in Need of Care and Protection
(Tick whichever is applicable)
Name of Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer/Probation Officer…………….
Date of preparing the Individual Care Plan…………………………………………
Case/Profile No……………of 20………………............…
FIR No……………………………………………………….
Under Sections (Type of offence), applicable in case of Children in Conflict with Law…............…
Police Station…………………………………………………
Address of the Board or the Committee………………………………………………
Admission No. (If child is in an institution) …..………………….…….
Date of Admission (if child is in an institution …………………………………....
Stay of the child (Fill as applicable)
(i) Short term (up to six months)
(ii) Medium Term (six months to one year)
(iii) Long term (more than 1 year)
FOR BOTH CATEGORIES OF CHILDREN WHO ARE PLACED IN INSTITUTIONAL OR NON-
INSTITUTIONAL CARE
1. Personal details (to be provided by child/parent/both on admission of the child in the institution)
(a) Name of the Child…………………………………
(b) Age/Date of Birth………...........…………………
(c) Sex: Male/Female.................……………………
(d) Father’s name…………………………...………..
(e) Mother’s name…………………………..…………
(f) Nationality………………………………........…….
(g) Religion………………………………........……….
(h) Caste………………………………….........………
(i) Language spoken………………….........………..
2. Level of Education…………………………………..
3. Details of Savings Account of the child, if any…………………….……..
4. Details of awards/rewards received by the child, if any…………………
5. Details of child’s belongings, if any………………………..………

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 91
6. Details of child’s parents’ property, if any-
7. Details of child’s parents bank accounts, if any-
8. Details of child’s insurance policy, if any-
9. Details of child’s parents’ insurance policy, if any-
10. Details of child’s parents job compensation, pension if any-
11. Details of child’s fixed deposits, savings, financial policy, mutual funds if any-
12. Details of parent’s loans, Mortgages, other financial liabilities, if any-
13. Details of property to be inherited, if any-
14. Whether succession certificate issued or not?- a. yes b. no
15. Details of succession certificate-
16. Whether legal heir certificate issued or not?- a. yes b. no
17. Details of legal heir certificate-
18. Whether the child is orphan/abandoned/surrendered?
19. Based on the results of Case History, Social Investigation report and interaction with the child, give
details on following areas of concern and interventions required, if any- (This is for both categories
of children who are placed in institutional or non-institutional care)
S. No Category Areas of concern Proposed
Interventions
1. 1 Child’s expectation from
care and protection
2. 2 Health and nutrition needs
3. 3 Emotional and psychological
support needed
4. 4 Educational and training
needs
5. 5 Leisure, creativity and play
6. 6 Attachments and inter-
personal relationships
7. 7 Self-care and life skill
training for protection
from all kinds of abuse,
neglect and maltreatment
8. 8 Independent living skills
9. 9 Any other significant
experiences which may have
impacted the development of
the child, like trafficking,
domestic violence, parental
neglect, bullying in school,
etc. (Please specify)
20. Whether the child has any siblings? Yes/No
21. Whether the child and his/her sibling are being placed together? A. Yes B. No
22. Whether the child and his/her siblings are being surrendered by the single parent/ Guardian? A. Yes
b. No C. Not Applicable
23. Case/Profile No. of the sibling/siblings-

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
24. In case the child is with disability or special needs or is terminally ill
(This may be relevant for both child in conflict with law and child in need of care and protection, as the
case may be)
(i) Whether the child who is suffering from disabilities have been provided with disability certificate.
Yes/No. If Yes, please state the disability certificate no ………...............
(ii) Whether such child has been provided with medical equipment like hearing aid, crutches etc.
Yes/No. If Yes, please specify……………………
(iii) Whether the child has been provided for compensation /relief for his/her disability. Yes/No. If yes,
please specify……………………………
(iv) Education requirements of the child…………………………………..
(v) Any other special needs of the child……………………………….
(vi) Any other recommendation………………………………………
25. If the child belongs to Children in Street Situations/Trafficked/Involved in Drug Peddling/Child
Labour(This may be relevant for both child in conflict with law and child in need of care and protection, as the
case may be)
(i) Whether the child belongs to Children in Street Situation: Yes/No.
(ii) Whether the child is a victim of child trafficking: Yes/No. If yes,
(iii) Whether the child was involved in drug- peddling: Yes/No.
(iv) Whether the child is a victim of child labour. Yes/No. If yes,
(v) Whether the child who has been a victim of Child-Labour has been provided compensation
under the Child Labour Rehabilitation-cum-Welfare Fund or any other scheme. Please
Specify………………………………………….
(vi) Whether such child who have been victim of child labour/ child trafficking/drug peddling/
or is a children in street situation provided with counselling? Yes/No
(vii) Whether the child has been provided any compensation? Yes/ No. If yes, please
specify…………………………
26. If the child is a victim of abuse including sexual abuse: (This may be relevant for both child in conflict
with law and child in need of care and protection, as the case may be)
(i) Whether the child has been provided counselling?............................
(ii) Whether any action has been taken against such offender/perpetrator? If Yes, Please
specify………………………………………….
(iii) Whether the child who has been a victim of sexual assault has been provided compensation as per
the compensation scheme under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012……………………………….
(iv) Any other compensation or relief provided to the child?......................
(v) Any other observations……………………………………
FOR CHILDREN PLACED IN INSTITUTIONAL CARE
27. Progress report of the child (to be prepared every fortnight for first three months and thereafter to be
prepared once a month)
[Note: Use different sheet for Progress Report]
1. Name of the Probation Officer/Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer………….
2. Period of the report……………………………………...……………………….
3. Admission No……………………………………………...…………………….
4. Board or Committee details.......…………………………………………………
5. Profile No…………………………….………………......………………………
6. Name of the Child……………………..……………..…………………………..
7. Place of interview ………………....……..Dates………......…....……………….

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 93
8. General conduct and progress of the child during the period of the report ………………………………
………………………………………………………………..…….………………………………………………
…….............…………………
9. Progress made with regard to proposed interventions as mentioned in point 19 of Part A of this form.
S.No Category Proposed Progress of the Child
Interventions
1. 1. Child’s expectation from care and
protection
2. 2. Health and nutrition needs
3. 3. Emotional and psychological
support needed
4. 4. Educational and training needs
5. 5. Leisure, creativity and play
6. 6. Attachments and inter-personal
relationships
7. 7. Self-care and life skill training for
protection
from all kinds of abuse, neglect and
maltreatment
8. 8. Independent living skills
9. 9. Any other significant experiences
which may have impacted the
development of the child, like
trafficking, domestic violence,
parental neglect, bullying in school,
etc. (Please specify)
10. Any proceeding held before the committee or Board or Children’s Court, details:-
11. Variation of conditions of bond:........................................
12. Change of residence of the child:.....................................
13. Other matters, if any:............................................................
14. Period of supervision completed. Details:…………………………………
15. Result of supervision with remarks (if any):………………………………….
16. Name and Addresses of the parent or guardian or fit person under whose care the child is to live after the
supervision is over:……………………………
Date of report:…………………
Signature of the Probation Officer…………………..
28. Pre-release report (to be prepared 15 days prior to release):
1. Details of place of transfer and authority concerned responsible in the place of transfer/release:............
....................................................................................
2. Details of placement of the child in different institutions/family:.................................
3. Training undergone and skills acquired:........................................................
4. Last progress report of the child (to be attached, refer Part B)
5. Rehabilitation and restoration plan of the child (to be prepared with reference to progress reports of the
child.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
S. No Category Rehabilitation and Restoration
plan of the child
1. Child’s expectation from care and protection
2. Health and nutrition
3. Emotional and psychological
4. Educational and Training
5. Leisure, creativity and play
6. Attachments and Inter-personal Relationships
8. Self-care and life skill training for Protection
from
all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment
9. Independent living skills
10. Any other
6. Date of release/transfer/repatriation:………………………………………….
7. Requisition for escort if required:…………………………………………….
8. Identification Proof of escort such as driving license, Aadhaar Card, etc:……
9. Recommended rehabilitation plan including possible placements/sponsorships…
10. Details of Probation Officer/Non-Governmental Organization for post-release follow
up:………………………………………………………………
11. Memorandum of Understanding with Non-Governmental Organisation identified for post-release follow-
up (Attach a copy)
12. Details of sponsorship agency/individual sponsor, if any:…………………
13. Memorandum of Understanding between the sponsoring agency and individual sponsor (Attach a
copy):…………………………
14. Medical examination report before release:……………………………………
15. Any other information:…………………………………………………………
29. Post-release/restoration report of the child:
1. Status of Bank Account: Closed/Transferred
2. Earnings and belongings of the child: handed over to the child or his parents/guardians – Yes/No
3. First interaction report of the Probation Officer/Child Welfare Officer/Case Worker/social worker/Non-
Governmental Organisation identified for follow-up with the child post-release:………………………………
4. Progress made with reference to Rehabilitation and Restoration Plan:………
5. Family’s behaviour/attitude towards the child:……………………….
6. Social milieu of the child, particularly attitude of neighbours’ / community:……….
7. How is the child using the skills acquired:……………………………………
8. Whether the child has been admitted to a school or vocation? Give date and name of the school/institute/any
other agency Yes/No ……….
9. Report of second and third follow-up interaction with the child after two months and six months
respectively:…………………………………………..
10. Efforts towards social mainstreaming and child’s opinion/views about it:..……
11. Identity Cards and Compensation

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 95
IDENTITY CARDS Present status (Please tick whichever
Applicable)
Yes No Action taken
Birth Certificate
School certificate
Caste certificate
Below Poverty Line Card
Disability Certificate
Immunization card
Ration Card
Adhaar Card
Received compensation
from Government
[Instruction: Please verify with the physical document]
30. Adoption
(i) Whether the child has been declared legally free for adoption?
A. Yes B. No C. Not Applicable
(If not applicable, then subsequent questions do not apply)
(ii) Whether the child has been placed in a Specialised Adoption Agency or Child Care Institution?
A. Specialised Adoption Agency B. Child Care Institution
(iii) Social Investigation Report by Child Welfare Officer/Case worker/social worker, as the case may be
submitted?
A. Yes B. No
(iv) Deed of surrender executed by the parents/guardian before the Committee?
A. Yes B. No C. Not Applicable
(v) Declaration submitted by District Child Protection Unit and Child Care Institution or Specialised
Adoption Agency that all restoration efforts have been made for the child-
A. Yes B. No
(vi) Nobody has approached District Child Protection Unit and Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption
Agency for claiming the child as biological parents or legal guardians-
A. Yes B. No
(vii) All timelines under Section 38 of the Act have been adhered to before declaring the child legally free for
adoption-
A. Yes B. No
FOR CHILDREN PLACED IN NON-INSTITUTIONAL CARE (EXCEPT ADOPTION)
1. Guardian’s name (if applicable)
2. Parents/Guardian’s Nationality…………………........…….
3. Parents/Guardian’s Religion……………………....……….
4. Child’s nationality-
5. Details of Adhaar card/voter Identity Card/pan card of the child…………………..
6. Details of Adhaar card/voter Identity Card /pan card of the child’s parents………
7. Caste………………………………….........………

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
8. Language spoken………………….........………..
9. Level of Education…………………………………………………………..
10. Whether the child has been provided compensation/relief under various schemes of government………..
11. Where is the child being placed? –
(a) guardian (b)foster care (c) sponsorship (d) single parent
12. Whether the child is being surrendered by the single parent/Guardian?
A. Yes B. No C. Not Applicable
13. If yes, then whether the surrender deed has been made? A. Yes B. No
14. Education- (Yes/No/Not applicable) If yes, then
(i) Whether the child has been enrolled in school or a special training center? ……
(ii) If child is enrolled in school, then
(a) Name of the school……
(b) Government/Private ……
(c) Class ………………..
(iii) Unified District Information System for Education Code of the said school……………………….
(iv) If child is enrolled in special training centre then,
(a) Center is Residential or Non-Residential……………….
(b) Duration of enrollment ……………
(v) Whether the child has been enrolled in school under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Right
to Education Act, 2009? Yes / No / NA
(vi) The Child Welfare Committee has recommended for continuing of education of the child in the same
school as the child was studying in? Yes / No
(vii) On the basis of the recommendation, whether the child is continuing education in the same school as he
was studying in? Yes/ No
(viii) The Child Welfare Committee has recommended for transfer of school for the child? Yes / No
(a) If yes, then what are the reasons given by the Child Welfare Committee for recommending transfer
of school? .......................................................
(ix) Whether the child has been admitted to/transferred to a new school? Yes/ No
(x) Details of new school along with its Unified District Information System for Education
Code………………….
(xi) Address and Contact Details……………………………………………….
(xii) Class in which admission/transfer taken place……………………………….
(xiii) Class in which the child was transferred from previous school…………
(xiv) On the basis of the recommendations of Child Welfare Committee, whether the school in which the child
is studying in is giving the benefit under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12(1)(c) of the Right to
Education Act, 2009 to the child? Yes / No
(xv) Whether the child is being given free education by the appropriate government? Yes / No
(xvi) Is the child availing any scholarship? Yes / No
a. If yes, name of the scholarship ………………………………..
b. Amount of scholarship …………………………………………
(xvii) Any other observation and recommendation made by the Child Welfare Committee for education of the
child………………………………………….
15. Sponsorship
(i) The child has been recommended for sponsorship by the Child Welfare Committee?
A. Yes B. No (If no, then subsequent questions do not apply)

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 97
(ii) Whether sponsorship for the child has been approved by a Committee headed by District Magistrate:
A. Yes B. No
(iii) Nature of sponsorship: i. Government ……… ii. Private ……………
(iv) Type of sponsorship
(a) Individual to Individual sponsorship
(b) Group Sponsorship
(c) Community or organisation sponsorship
(d) Support to families through sponsorship
(e) Support to children homes and special homes
(f) Sponsorship through:
i. Institutions,
ii. Companies
iii. Corporations either public or private
(g) Any other
(v) Whether child has started receiving money under the sponsorship program-
A. Yes B. No
(vi) Recommended duration of sponsorship:.....................................
(vii) Any other information:........................................
16. Restoration of the child:
(i) Whether the child is being restored to:-
Single Parent / Biological Parents / Guardian/ Relative
(ii) Name of the person to whom the child is being restored to……………..
(iii) Address and contact details of person where the child is being restored to……
(iv) If the child is being restored to Guardian/relative, then-
(v) Relationship of the child with the guardian/relative-
(vi) Does the guardian/relative have children of their own? A. yes B. No
(vii) If yes, Details of guardian/relatives’ children-
(viii) Social and financial condition of the guardian/relative-
(ix) Whether the child will be staying in the same State where the child was found? Yes/No
(x) Whether the child needs to be transferred to another State for restoration? Yes/No. If yes:
(a) Name of the State where the child is restored to-
(b) An escort is required for transfer of the child to another State?
A. Yes B. No.
If yes: Identification Proof of escort such as driving license, Aadhar Card, etc…………
(c) Whether District Child Protection Unit/ Child Welfare Committee of the concerned district of the
State where the child is being transferred to has been informed about the transfer orders? Yes/No
(d) Whether the child’s documents/Social Investigation Report/ Individual Care Plan/ Orders of
Child Welfare Committee have been transferred to the concerned CWC of the State? Yes/No
(e) Details of Child Welfare Committee where the case is transferred……………………..
(xi) Child Welfare Committee has recommended follow-up of the child post restoration: Yes / No
(xii) Status of bank accounts of the child…………………………………..
(xiii) The belongings of the child are handed over to the child/parent/guardian: Yes/No
(xiv) Identity Cards and Compensation:

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
IDENTITY CARDS Present status (Please
tick whichever is
applicable)
Yes No Action taken
Birth Certificate
School certificate
Caste certificate
Below Poverty Line Card
Disability Certificate
Immunization card
Ration Card
Adhaar Card
Received compensation from
Government
REPATRIATION OF THE CHILD
(i) Whether the child needs to be repatriated. Yes/No
(ii) If yes, whether such repatriation is: (tick whichever is applicable)
inter-district
inter-state
inter-country
(iii) Whether information about repatriation of the child has been informed to the:-
District Magistrate.
State Government.
Central Government.
(iv) Has the process of repatriation of the child been initiated? Yes / No . Details:........
(v) Whether the details of the child to be repatriated has been informed to National or State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be?
(vi) Any other recommendation……………………………….
…………………………………………
Signature of the Probation Officer/
Child Welfare Officer/District Child Protection Unit
Stamp and Seal where available”
61. In the principal rules, for Form 16, the following Form shall be substituted, namely: –
“FORM 16
[Rules17(1)(v), 17(1)(v a), and 20(2)]
QUARTERLY REPORT BY CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
District
Quarterly Report for the period: From……………to…………..
Details of Child Welfare Committee:

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 99
Sl. Details Date of Appointment Training attended
No.
1. Chairperson
2. Member 1
3. Member 2
4. Member 3
5. Member 4
Details of Cases with Child Welfare Committee:
Sl. Number of Number of Number of Number of Reasons for
No. cases at the Cases received cases cases pending pendency
beginning of during the disposed of at the end of
quarter quarter during the quarter
quarter
Final Order
Total number of final orders passed during the quarter
Released Trans Ordere Repatri Declared Ordered Recommen Initiated
to fer d ated Legally for ded Process of
parent/ To to To free for Foster to the compensati
guardian other stay in Foreign adoption care/ Juvenile on
/fit person/ Child Child Country sponsorshi Justice to child,
fit Welfa Care p Board if eligible
institution re Institut /Aftercare For filing
Com ion FIR
mittee
Details of the case regarding Restored children by Child Welfare Committee:
S. No. of children Restored No. of No. of children No. of children
children restored with fit restored and
No
restored person recommended
with for follow up
Same Different Different guardian relative
parents
District District State s
Details of the cases of Death of Child in Child Care Institution:
S. No. Name of the Cause of death Name of Child Period of
deceased child Care Institution stay in
the child was Child Care
placed Institution

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
100 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Details of the cases of Runaway children:
S. No. Name of the Name of Child FIR No. Background of the
runaway child Care Institution, child
the child was
placed
VISIT TO HOMES BY CHAIRPERSON/ MEMBERS
Date of visit:.........................................
Name and Address of Home visited:...............................
Remarks/ Suggestions of the Committee:…………….
Signature of Chairperson
Seal.”
62. In the principal rules, after Form 16, the following Form shall be inserted, namely:–
“FORM 16 A
[Rule 43(2) and (3)]
MONTHLY REPORT BY CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
District
Monthly Report for the period: From……………to…………..
DETAILS OF THE CASE PERTAINING TO LEGALLY FREE FOR ADOPTION
Break-up of Pendency before Child Welfare Committee
Orphan Abandoned Surrendered Total
Children for Children Children for Children > 2 Children 0-18 years
0-2 > 2 years 0-2 years and <18
and <18 years
years
Pending for > Pending Pending for > Pending for > Pending for > 2
2 months for > 4 2 months 4 months months
months
M F M F M F M F M F
Signature of Chairperson
Seal”
63. In the principal rules, for Form 22, the following Form shall be substituted, namely: –
“FORM 22
[Rule 19(8)]
SOCIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
(Tick whichever is applicable)
1. Sl. No……………………….
2. Produced before the Child Welfare Committee…………………..
3. Case No………………………………………
4. Social Investigation Report Prepared by: District Child Protection Unit/ Social Worker/ Case Worker/ Person
in charge of Home/ representative of Non- Governmental Organization

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 101
5. Details of child in need of care and protection:
(i) Name…………………………………………………….
(ii) Age……………………………….. DD/MM/YY ………………………………..
(iii) Gender…………………………………………………………….
(iv) Caste: (tick as applicable)
General
Scheduled Caste
Scheduled Tribe
Other Backward Class
Others, specify………
Not Known ……………..
(v) Religion……………………………………………………………
(vi) Father’s Name……………………………………………………
(vii) Mother’s Name ………………………………………………
(viii) Guardian’s Name………………………………………..
(ix) Permanent Address……………………………………….
(x) Landmark of the address………………………………
(xi) Address of last residence ……………………………
(xii) Contact information father/mother/family member/guardian…………
(xiii) Whether the child needs an interpreter/translator: Yes/ No
(xiv) Whether the child is- Orphan / Abandoned / Surrendered / Others
(xv) Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any………………
(xvi) Family Details: (YES/NO) If yes, then:
S.N. Name and Age Sex Educati Occupation Income Health History of Addiction
Relations on Status
Mental
hip
Illness
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
(xvii) Relationship among family members:
Father and mother Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Father and child Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Mother and child Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Father and siblings Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Mother and siblings Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Child and siblings Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Child and relative Cordial/Non cordial/Not known

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
102 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
6. With whom was the child staying prior to production before the Committee:
(tick as applicable)
Parent(s) – Mother / Father / Both
Siblings / Blood relative
Guardian(s) – Relationship
Friends
On the street
Night shelter
Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
Child Care Institution:
Children’s home
Shelter home
Specialised Adoption Agency
Fit Facility
Other (please specify)……………………………..
7. In case of orphan and abandoned child-
(i) Where was the child found? ……………………………….
(ii) What steps are being taken to trace the biological parents/relatives of the child? Please specify….
(iii) If the biological roots of the child are known, reasons for death of both parents of the
child…………………………..
8. Whether the child needs to be repatriated: Yes/No. If yes:
Inter- district repatriation
Inter- state repatriation
Inter- country repatriation
9. Whether child is eligible for the benefit of sponsorship: Yes/No
10. Whether the child is eligible for any scheme or entitlement.
Yes/No (If Yes, lease specify) …………………
11. Whether child has received any kind of compensation in regard to the demise of any parent: Yes/No; Please
Specify………………..…
12. Whether child should get benefit under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section of Section 12 of the Right to
Education Act, 2009: Yes / No
13. Financial support recommended for the child:
(i) Whether the child’s parents had any property/FD/Cash/Insurance/bank accounts prior to their sudden
demise: Yes/No; Details thereof……………
(ii) Whether the child’s parents have any loans, mortgages, financial liabilities?
A. Yes B. No. Details thereof……………………………………………
(iii) Whether the child’s parents have any collateral against that mortgage?
A. Yes B. No. Details thereof………………………………………………….
(iv) Whether the child’s parents have any family business?
A. yes B. no. Details thereof….
(v) Whether the child has acquired any right/share in the property (self-acquired/ancestral) from the deceased
parent: Yes/No; Details thereof…………….
14. Details of education of the child:
(i) Whether the child has received education: Yes/No

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 103
(ii) If yes, specify education up to which class…………………
(iii) If the child is enrolled in school, then name of the school-…………….
(iv) Whether the school of the child is registered on Unified District Information System for Education, if Yes,
state Unified District Information System for Education Code…………………
(v) Type of school- Government/ Private.
(vi) Whether the child has been enrolled in special training centre. Yes/No. If Yes specify duration of
enrolment of child in Special Training center……………………………………
(vii) Whether the Special Training Center was Residential/Non- Residential
(viii) The reason for leaving School (tick as applicable)
Failure in the class last studied
Lack of interest in the school activities
Indifferent attitude of the teachers
Peer group influence
To earn and support the family
Sudden demise of parents
Bullying in school
Rigid school atmosphere
Absenteeism followed by running away from school
There is no appropriate level of school nearby
Abuse in school
Humiliation in school
Corporal punishment
Medium of instruction
Others (please specify)………………………………………………
(ix) Attitude of class mates towards the child (If applicable) ………………
(x) Attitude of teachers and classmates towards the child (If Applicable) ………
(xi) Vocational Training (if any)…………………………………….
15. Other factors of importance if any………………………………………….
16. Habits of the child: (tick as applicable)
Watching TV/movies
Playing indoor/outdoor games
Reading books
Drawing/painting/acting/singing
Religious activities
Begging
Gambling
Alcohol consumption
Smoking
Drug use, if yes, specify………………………….
Any other, please specify………………………………
17. Extra-curricular interests……………………………………………………..
18. Outstanding characteristics and personality traits…………………………….

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
104 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
19. Majority of the friends are (tick as applicable)
Educated
The same age group
Older in age
Younger in age
Male
Female
Addicts
Children in conflict with law
20. If child is friends with adults, please specify…………………………
21. Attitude of the child towards friends………………………………………..
22. Attitude of friends towards the child………………………………………….
23. Observation about neighbourhood (to assess the influence of neighbourhood on the child)……………….
24. Whether the child has any addiction- YES / NO, if yes, specify……………..
25. In case the child is with disability or special needs or is terminally ill
(If Yes, Specify):
A. Health status of the child
(i) Respiratory disorders - present / not known / absent
(ii) Hearing impairment - present / not known / absent
(iii) Eye diseases- present / not known / absent
(iv) Dental disease- present / not known / absent
(v) Cardiac diseases- present / not known / absent
(vi) Skin disease-present / not known / absent
(vii) Sexually transmitted diseases- present / not known / absent
(viii) Neurological disorders- present / not known / absent
(ix) Mental handicap- present / not known / absent
(x) Physical handicap- present / not known / absent
(xi) Urinary tract infections –present / not known / absent
(xii) Others (please specify)………………..
B. Whether the child is differently abled- Yes or No, if yes, specify-
(a) Hearing Impairment
(b) Speech Impairment
(c) Physical disability
(d) Mental disability
(e) Locomotive disability
(f) Others (please specify)……………………….
C. Whether the child has a valid disability certificate. (If Yes, provide details)
D. Mental condition of the child: (Present and past)…………………….
E. Physical condition of the child: (Present and past)………………
F. Whether the child needs special education- Yes/No. If yes, specify:
G. Special education already included in the current school curriculum: Yes/No/Not Applicable
H. Whether the Child requires or has been using any medical equipment. (If yes, please specify) ……………
I. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any……

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 105
J. Whether the child is receiving any pension under disability schemes. Yes/No (If yes then specify)
……………….
K. Any other remark/observation…………………………………
26. In case the child belongs to Children in Street Situations/Trafficked/Involved in Drug Peddling/Child
Labour:
A. Whether the child belongs to any of the category under Children in Street Situations: Yes/No. If yes,
specify:
(i) Children without support living on the streets all alone
(ii) Children stay on the streets in the day and are back home in the night with their families who reside in a
nearby slum/hutments.
(iii) Children living on the streets with their families:
B. With whom was the child staying prior to production before the Committee:
(i) Parent – Mother / Father / Both
(ii) Siblings / Blood relative
(iii) Guardian – Relationship
(iv) Friends
(v) On the street
(vi) Night shelter
(vii) Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
(viii) Other (please specify)……………………………
C. If there is history/ tendency of the child to run away from home.
Yes/ No. If yes:........................
(i) What is the parents’ attitude towards discipline in the home and child’s reaction…….
(ii) Reasons for leaving the family:
(a) Abuse by parent(s)/guardian(s)/step parents(s)
(b) In search of employment
(c) Peer group influence
(d) Incapacitation of parents
(e) Criminal record of parents
(f) Separation of Parents
(g) Demise of parents
(h) Poverty
(i) Others (please specify)…………………
D. Where was the child found, please specify ……….
E. Whether the child has been used for begging: Yes/No
F. Whether the child has been involved in rag-picking: Yes/No
G. Whether the child is used by any gangs or adults or group of adults or has been used for drug peddling:
Yes/No
H. Whether the child has been bought or sold or procured or trafficked for any purpose: Yes/No, if yes:
I. Whether the child was trafficked with knowledge of parents: Yes/No
J. Whether the child was sold by the parents/relatives: Yes/No
If yes, then whether any action has been taken against the parents/relative: Yes/No
K. Whether the child was employed as a labour: Yes/No, if yes:
(i) Industry in which the child was employed…………………….

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
106 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ii) Whether the child has faced exploitation at work : Yes/No
(a) Extracted work without payment
(b) Little or low wages with longer duration of work
(c) Others (Please specify)……………..
(iii) Details of income utilization…………………..
(iv) Any occupational hazard faced by the child: Yes/No. If yes, specify………….
(v) Whether case filed against employer: Yes/No. If yes, specify case detail……….
(vi) Compensation provided to the child:
(a) Interim
(b) Final
(c) Child Labour Rehabilitation cum Welfare Fund
L. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any…………
M. Whether temporary shelter has been provided to child: Yes/No
N. Has any plan been made for rehabilitation of the child, specify……………….
O. Any other remarks/observation………………………………………
27. In case the child has faced any kind of abuse, including sexual abuse, or has been a victim of any
offence:
A. Whether the child is a victim of any offence: Yes/No
B. Types of abuse faced by the child:
(a) Verbal abuse– parents/siblings/ employers/others (please specify)…....…
(b) Physical abuse- parents/siblings/ Employers/others (please specify)…....…
(c) Sexual abuse by- (tick as applicable)
relatives through blood
relatives through adoption
relatives through marriage
relatives through guardianship
persons in foster care
person living in the same or shared household
any person in the ownership, or management, or staff, of any institution providing services to a
child
any person in position of trust or authority
Others (please specify)
(d) Others– parents/siblings/ employers/others (please specify)…………
C. Types of ill- treatment met by the child:
(i) Denial of food– parents/siblings employers/other (please specify)…….
(ii) Beaten mercilessly– parents/ Siblings/employers/other (please specify)
(iii) Causing injury– parents/ siblings/employers/other (please specify)……
(iv) Detention- parents/ siblings/employers/other (please specify)…………
(v) Any other (please specify)………………..
D. In case of sexual abuse:
(i) Relationship with the perpetrator……………………
(ii) Gender of the perpetrator……………………
(iii) Age of the perpetrator……………..
(iv) How the child came in contact with the perpetrator……………

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 107
(v) Any other child from the same place who is abused / harassed / taken / sent by the perpetrator….
(vi) Whether any other person/s were involved in the offence…………………
(vii) Whether any compensation has been recommended to the child under the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012: Yes/No.
If any other, please specify…………………………………..
E. Case/FIR registered by the police: Yes/No. If yes, specify Case No./ FIR No.……….……………..
F. Whether the child has been a victim of cyber-bullying: Yes/No. If yes:
(i) Cyber bullied while using internet system at home
(ii) Cyber bullied while using internet system in school
(iii) Cyber- bullied while attending school classes from home
G. Has the child been counselled: Yes/No, if yes, provide details…………….
H. Any other remark/observations…………………………
I. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any………………
28. In case the child is victim of child marriage or is married:
A. Name of the spouse…………………………….
B. Age of the spouse……………………………….
C. Date of marriage (DD/MM/YY)………………………………..
D. Place of marriage……………………..
E. Reasons for conducting marriage of the child…………………….
F. People who were involved in getting the marriage of the child conducted- i. Parents ii. Relatives iii. Others.
G. If others, please specify…………………..
H. Whether any case has been registered by police: Yes/No.
If yes, provide details…………………………..
I. If any action taken, details thereof………………………
J. Any other remarks/observation…………………………..
29. Whether the child needs to be repatriated: Yes/No. If yes: (tick as applicable)
(i) Inter- district repatriation
(ii) Inter- state repatriation
(iii) Inter- country repatriation
OBSERVATIONS OF INQUIRY
30. Emotional factors…………………………………
31. Physical condition……………………………………
32. Social and economic factors…………………………….
33. Suggestive causes of the problems………………………
34. Analysis of the case, including reasons/contributing factors for the offence…
35. Reasons for child’s need for care and protection……………… ………..
36. Opinion of experts consulted…………………………………..
37. Mental Health Expert assessment………………….
38. Risk analysis for the child to be restored to the surviving parent/relatives/guardian……………….
39. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any…......
40. Recommendation of District Child Protection Unit/Case Worker/Social Worker regarding psychological
support, rehabilitation and reintegration of the child and suggested plan……………………………..
Signature
(of the person assigned)
*****”

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
108 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
64. In the principal rules, in Form 27, in serial number (1), after item (iii), the following item shall be inserted,
namely:-
“(iii a) Darpan ID No. ...........”.
65. In the principal rules, in Form 39, in the heading, the words “INCLUDING GROUP FOSTER CARE” shall be
omitted.
66. In the principal rules, for Form 46, the following Form shall be substituted namely:–
“FORM 46
[Rule 21(10), 41(3) and 41(9)]
INSPECTION OF CHILD CARE INSTITUTIONS
(Fill as applicable)
Date and time of visit:
Name of the officials inspecting the Home :
1. ………….
2. ………….
3. ……………
Name and address of Institution:
Type of Facility:_____________________(Children Home/Observation Home/Special Home/Place of
Safety/Open Shelter/Specialised Adoption Agency/Fit Facility)
If aided/supported: by State Government, Name of Department:………………
If run by Government:………………..
Name of Person-in-charge: …………..
Contact No. ………………….
E-mail ID: ……………………….
Indicator Status Remarks Acts/Rules
(Yes or No) (In case of No
Compliance or
Partial Compliance)
LEGAL STATUS
Registration of the Parent Organization Section 41/Rule
under the Societies Registration Act 21: Registration of
1860/The Indian Trusts Act 1882/The the Child Care
Companies Act 2013 Institutions
Registration No. of the Parent
Organization under the Societies
Registration Act 1860/The Indian Trusts
Act 1882/The Companies Act 2013
Registration of the Parent Organization
under the Juvenile Justice(Care &
Protection) Act 2015
Registration No. of the Parent
Organization under the Juvenile
Justice(Care & Protection) Act 2015
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act
2010, Registration (if any)

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 109
FUNCTIONING
Sanctioned capacity (in numbers)
Total number of Children placed in the Rule 18 and 19:
Institution Production before
a Committee and
Number of Children living in the Home
Inquiry
without the order of the Child Welfare
Committee/ Juvenile Justice Board
Are there children in the age group of 0-5
years staying there?
(Specify number)
Are there children above 18 years staying
there?
(Specify number)
No. of new admissions in the current
month
(Specify number)
No. of children who have moved
out/released
(Specify number)
No. of children referred by Child Welfare
Committee/ Juvenile Justice Board during
the month.
(Specify number)
No. of children produced before Child
Welfare Committee/ Juvenile Justice
Board during the month.
(Specify number)
No. of children as on last day of the
previous month.
(Specify number)
No. of children with special needs, if yes,
give details.
(Specify number)
Total number of children present in the Section 41:
Institution are less than its capacity or as Registration of
per its capacity Child Care
Institutions
Number of children residing for more Observation
than 04 months Home/Special
Home/Place of
Safety
Management Committee Rule 39:
Management
Average Number of meetings conducted
Committee
in a year
(Specify number)
Children’s Committees constituted Rule 40:

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
110 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Average Number of meetings conducted Children’s
in a year (Specify number) Committees
Adoption Committee constituted Section 65:
Average Number of meetings conducted Specialised
in a year (Specify number) Adoption Agency
Open Shelter/Shelter Home has any other Open Shelter
activity apart from psycho-social
rehabilitation of children for a short
period of time
Information regarding the children is
uploaded on a portal, as specified by the
Central Government.
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Building ( Rented or owned)
Sign board displayed indicating name,
type of Child Care Institution, contact
details
Education (Class room)
Dormitories
Rule 29: Physical
Kitchen Infrastructure
Counseling
Recreation with television
Sick room
Library
Visitors’ room
Vocational training
Dining hall
Store
Record room
Office room
Staff Residence
Bathrooms
Toilets
Computer with internet
Boundary wall/fencing
Separate living area for children below 10
years
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY
Records stored safely
Essential Details including- Emergency
Numbers

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 111
Duty Chart
Rule 26:
Menu Chart
Management and
Attendance Status Monitoring of
Child Care
Weekly Programme Schedule
Institutions
Safe transport facility for children
attaining education outside the campus
Separate facilities for children from staff
and management
Facilities and support (equipment, staff,
teaching and learning materials/aids) for
children with special needs
Visual needs
Intellectual needs
Hearing needs
Rooms and dormitories being free of
unstable heavy equipment, furniture, or
other items that children could pull down
on themselves
Good condition of ceilings walls, floor
coverings, draperies, curtains, blinds,
furniture, fixtures, and equipment
Clear guidelines regarding access of
staff/visitors in identified areas especially
in children’s dormitories/toilets
Walls and compound painted with Specialised
attractive paints/cartoons/pictures etc. Adoption Agency
A cradle has been placed near the outside
gate or not
Infants, toddlers and older children are
segregated or not
Restrictions on entry in the infants and
toddler areas
Freedom of movement of mobile infants
and toddlers in a safe area
Privacy maintained in toilets and bathing Rule 67: Security
areas or not Measures
Basic emergency medical care equipment
available or not
Special emergency medical care
equipment available or not
Child friendly bathrooms / bathing areas Rule 31: Sanitation
(1:10) available exclusively for children and Hygiene
or not.
(Specify number)
Child friendly toilets (1:7) available
exclusively for children or not
(Specify number)

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
112 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Safe and purified drinking water storage
is available or not
Safe and purified drinking water is
provided to all children or not
Proper drainage and garbage disposal
facilities available or not
STAFF
One Person- in-Charge
Two Counselor
Three Child Welfare Officer/ probation
officer/Case workers
Four House Mother/ House Father Rule 26:
Management and
One Medical Officer (Physician)
Monitoring of
Child Care
One Para medical staff
Institutions
One Store keeper cum accountant
One (part time) Art and Craft cum music
teacher
One (part time) PT instructor cum Yoga
Trainer
One Driver
Two Cook
Two Helper
Two House Keeping
Security Guard
Any Other
Whether personal files of each staff are
available including-
Records of Recruitment
Reference Check
Work Profile
Performance Appraisal
Female Superintendent / Manager /In-
Charge available for girls’ unit
TRAINING OF STAFF
Training organised for the staff viz: Rule 89: Training
of Personnel
Social Workers
Dealing with
Child Welfare Officers Children
Case Workers
rehabilitation cum placement Officers
care givers
House Fathers and House Mothers

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 113
Security personnel and other staff
The staff of the Child Care Institution has
been given refresher trainings or not
Rehabilitation-cum-Placement Officer Rule 65:
Rehabilitation-
cum-Placement
Officer
Superintendent/Manager/ In-charge stay Rule 61: Duties of
on the campus the Officer-in-
charge of a Child
Care Institution
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
Enough/safe toys are available and Rule 38:
accessible to children or not Recreational
Facilities
Enough suitably equipped outdoor space
for play is available and accessible to
children or not
Availability of Baby Care Unit with
special emergency medical care
equipment (MCE) or not
Availability of safe toys for infants and
toddlers to stimulate their healthy
development or not
Individual beds are available and
provided to children or not
Rule 29: Physical
Children segregated according to age Infrastructure
group for stay and activities or not
Children segregated according to gender
for stay and activities or not
Activities are conducted under staff Rule 34/35:
supervision to minimize the risk of injury Medical Care and
to children or respond as promptly as Mental Health
possible or not
Active supervision of children in
emotional distress (due to fear, trauma, or
illness) or not
PREVENTION AND PROTECTION FROM ABUSE
Rule 76: Abuse
and Exploitation of
Standard operating procedure for child
the child
protection
Standard operating procedure is adhered
to by staff and Management
Functional and accessible complaint and
grievance redressal mechanism including
for abuse prevention is in place, such as-
Suggestion Box
Child helpline
CCTV Cameras

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
114 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Children Committees
Regular Staff-Children Interface
Training and Orientation of children
Any complaint found in the Suggestion or
Complaint Book
DAILY ROUTINE
Daily routine of activity is followed Rule 32: Daily
Routine
Daily routine is drawn up in consultation
with the children’s committee or as per
the need
Daily routine is on public display at
prominent places in the institution
NUTRITION
Staff is aware of the nutritional Rule 33: Nutrition
requirement of children at varying stages and Diet Scale
of development
Meals are planned in consultation with
children
Meals are provided in accordance with
prescribed norms/diet scale
Birthdays of children are celebrated
Special meal is provided during
festivals/occasions
Special diet is provided to sick/special
health children, as per advice of Doctor
Home receives sponsored
cooked/uncooked food items, lunch,
dinner etc. from donors
Cooked food if sponsored is
tasted/checked by care giver before
serving
Ayah/caretakers are supervised by other
staff while babies are fed
CLOTHING, BEDDING HYGIENE
All children are provided individual, Rule 30: Clothing,
clean, seasonal and age appropriate Bedding, Toiletries
clothes, articles and toiletries as per and other articles
norms
All children are provided individual,
clean, seasonally appropriate mats and
sleeping materials as per norms
Sleeping material is cleaned /sanitized Rule 31: Sanitation
regularly or before reuse as needed and Hygiene
Rooms are regularly fumigated,
disinfected and material provided to each
child for prevention of infection and
disease

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 115
Each child has been allocated a secured
space to store personal belongings
Old articles like clothes, bed sheets, mats,
bedding, etc. if donated, are cleaned/
disinfected before use
Whether following facilities available in
Home for children:
Fans
Coolers
Air Conditioner
Heaters for Winter
HEALTH CARE
Every child undergoes a health check-up Rule 34/35:
on admission Medical Care/
Mental Health
Every child has regular health checkups
Every child has health card and the
records/files are maintained and updated
Nurse/paramedical staff is available in the
home at night
Medicines are administered to the child
by a staff/ nurse
Staff is trained to provide First Aid
Mandatory Immunization is done of
children up to 6 years of age
EDUCATION
Educational assessment is conducted and Rule 36/69:
need of every child addressed Education/
Institutional
All children are provided with age
Management of
appropriate formal education
Children
Enough emphasis on stimulating infants
to learn through a play way learning
process
Age appropriate, feasible and market
oriented vocational training is provided
Rule 37:
Children are consulted in selecting Vocational
vocational training being provided to Training
them
Age appropriate life skill education is
provided
RECREATION
Indoor recreation facilities are available Rule 38:
for children Recreational
Facilities
Outdoor recreation facilities are available
for children

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
116 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Staff engage with children in such
recreation activities
Any innovative activities to develop
cooperation/ participation, resilience, etc.
are harnessed
ADMISSION AND REPORTING
All children admitted to the Home are Section 31/ Rule
produced before the Child Welfare 18: Production
Committee within the prescribed time before Committee
limit
All children in the Home are housed in
compliance with the Child Welfare
Committee orders
All children admitted to the Home are Section 10/Rule 9:
produced before the Juvenile Justice
Production before
Board within the prescribed limit
a Board
All children in the Observation Home
Special Home/Place of Safety are housed
in compliance with the Juvenile Justice
Board Orders
Every child is restored through the Child
Welfare Committee or the Juvenile
Justice Board
The case history of each child is
submitted before the Child Welfare
Committee within the stipulated time
period as directed
The Home has made efforts to trace the Rule19 / 69:
biological family/guardian of the child Inquiry/
Institutional
Home submits any report of its own Management of
efforts to trace biological families to the Children
Child Welfare Committee
INDIVIDUAL CASE RECORD
Individual Care Plan is prepared for every
Child
If yes, Individual Care Plan is prepared
for every child is being implemented
A professional Social Worker or
experienced personal has prepared the
Individual Care Plan (ICP) for every child
ICP has been prepared for children in the
Home within 30 days of admission of the
child
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
Home maintains a master admission Rule 77:
register Maintenance of
Registers
Home updates the master admission
register in Track Child
Home updates the master admission
register in centralised database and portal

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 117
relating to children and prospective
adoptive parents for the purpose of
adoption
Number of children present tallies with
the attendance register as on date
Monthly data about children is sent to Rule 22: Open
State Adoption Resource Agency/ District Shelter
Child Protection Unit as the case may be
Documentary proof of restoration-
parent/guardian letter with identity proof
regarding the same is available
Whether details of legally free children
for adoption is maintained by the
institution
The Child Care Institution maintains
all the relevant information of the child
i.e. --
Individual case file with individual care
plan
Case History
Inquiry report
Child Welfare Committee Orders
Medical Examination Report (MER)
Child Study Report (CSR)
Home Study Report (HSR)
Birth Certificate
Court order
Quarterly Progress Report
Health report
Report of counselor or social worker, Rule 77:
social history/case history of each child is Maintenance of
available in the personal file Registers
Initial reports of interaction with the child
are on record
REGISTERS
Master Admission and discharge register
Supervision register
Case file of each child
Medical File and Medical Report
Attendance register of children and staff
Order Book
Inquiry report file
Children’s suggestion book/file

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
118 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Voucher, Cash Book, Ledger, Journal and
Annual Accounts
Grant utilization register
Stock register
Record of minutes of meetings of--
Management Committee
Complaints Committee
Staff-Children interaction
Staff-Meetings
Nutrition/diet register
Budget statement register
Visitors’ book
Staff movement register
Personal belonging register
Children’s movement register
IF A SPECIALISED ADOPTION AGENCY
There is a professional social worker/
experienced personnel available in the
agency for preparing Child Study Report
Formal Child Study Report of each child
is prepared after the child is declared free
for adoption by the Child Welfare
Committee
There is a professional social
worker/experienced personnel available
in the agency for preparing Home Study
Report
Medical Examination Report of each
child is prepared after the child is
declared free for adoption by the Child
Welfare Committee by a pediatrician
There was pendency of completion of
Home Study Report
There was pendency of completion of
Child Study Report
There was pendency of completion of
Medical Examination Report
All the reports are uploaded on
centralised database and portal relating to
children and prospective adoptive parents
for the purpose of adoption
ADOPTION RELATED
The agency expeditiously uploads Child
Study Report, Medical Examination
Report, as soon as children become
legally free for adoption

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 119
The decision for referral and matching of
each child is taken by the Adoption
Specialised
Committee
Adoption Agency
The agency prepares every adoptable
child psychologically for his or her
assimilation with the adoptive family and
the new surroundings
The agency has developed
leaflets/pamphlets/literature/ any other
publicity materials depicting the process
of adoption
Adoption register is maintained and
complete adoption file of each child
placed in adoption is available
Regular follow-ups of children placed in
adoption
The agency receives/maintains post
placement progress reports in respect of
children placed in in-country adoption
and inter-country adoption
All post-adoption records are kept in a
manner, which prevents accessibility of
larger public
The agency kept all the information and
documents as well as belongings of the
child in safe custody
There has been a plan how to preserve the
information and how to disseminate in
case the child comes for searching the
root
There has been any disruption occurred in
case of children placed in in-country
adoption
There has been any disruption occurred in
case of children placed in inter-country
adoption
The agency completes the Home Study
Report of all Prospective Adoptive
Parents registered, expeditiously and
within stipulated time frame
The agency places a child in pre-adoption
Foster Care on completion of assigning
and referral processes and after observing
necessary formalities as laid down in the
Guidelines
The agency receives Adoption fees as per
the Norms
The agency obtains appropriate
information from birth parent(s) before
surrender of the child
The agency gets the surrender deed
executed only in the presence of the Child
Welfare Committee

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
120 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
The agency explains the implications of
surrendering their child to the parents
including the possibility of adoption of
the child by foreigners and of no further
contact with him or her
The agency informs the parent(s) that
from the date of surrender they would get
a reconsideration period of sixty days
during which period they can take back
the child
The agency maintains the confidentiality
of the unwed mother and the biological
parents
The agency restores the child to the
biological parents after the
reconsideration period is over, if claimed
by the parents
The agency provides counselling to
Prospective Adoptive Parents and
children as and when required by them
The agency provides counselling to
Prospective Adoptive Parents before the
Home Study Report is prepared
The agency advices/encourages
Prospective Adoptive Parents to contact
Adoptive Parents Associations, adoptive
families and older adoptees to understand
the entire process of adoption
The agency counsels the adoptive parents,
not to change the name of an older child
so as to help the child keep his or her
identity
FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY
Details of information about the sources
of funding and that of the organisation as
whole or separately available
Sources of Funding-
Govt. aid/grant
National Donors
International Donors (FCRA)
Corporate Donors
Own sources
Others
Details of project wise Bank Account(s) Accounts and
maintained by it with A/c No, purpose, Audit
amount received including FCRA
Account available
The Home submits a copy of audited
accounts of organization with its audit
report and Annual Report within six
months from date of closing of financial
year, to State Government

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 121
The accounts are audited annually by an
authorized Chartered Accountant
The Home has provided copies of
Audited Statement of Accounts and
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act
2010, Returns for last 2 years to the
competent authority
Grants are released as per norm and time
taken for
The agency has provided information Specialised
about the details of child wise adoption Adoption Agency
charges received during last two years for
in-country and inter-country separately
The agency receives adoption charges
over and above the prescribed norms
The agency maintains financial records
including receiving and utilization of
adoption fee
The Home submits a copy of audited
accounts of organization with its audit
report and Annual Report within six
months from date of closing of financial
year, to State Government
The Adoption Agency utilizes funds
available in the form of Adoption fee in
accordance with the specified norms
The accounts are audited annually by an
authorized Chartered Accountant
INSPECTIONS
The Home has been inspected by the Rule 41:
Inspection Committee Inspection
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by the Inspection Committee
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the Section 30:
Child Welfare Committee Functions and
Responsibilities of
Feedback was provided on the inspection
Committee
by the Child Welfare Committee
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the Inspections
Juvenile Justice Committee of the High conducted by JJ
Court Committee and
Department of
Feedback was provided on the inspection
WCD
by the Juvenile Justice Committee of the
High Court
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the
appropriate authority of Department of
Women and Child Development

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
122 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by appropriate authority of Department of
Women and Child Development
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the Rule 91:
National Commissions for Protection of Monitoring by
Child rights National/State
Commission for
Feedback was provided on the inspection
Protection of Child
by the National Commissions for
Rights
Protection of Child rights
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the
State Commissions for Protection of
Child rights
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by State Commissions for Protection of
Child rights
The feedback report is positive
Previously, Social audit has been
conducted of the Home and the report has
been positive
The Home has a copy of the inspection Rule 41:
recommendations and record of action Inspection
thereof
Any improvement has taken place based
on the Inspection Reports
PROGRAMMATIC LINKAGES
Medical care and Mental health services Rule 34: Medical
for children Care
Education Rule 36: Education
Vocational training Rule 37:
Vocational
Training
Life Skills, Art and Dance and Drama Rule 38:
therapy and Occupational therapy and Recreational
other issue-based workshops Facilities
Recreational activities including sports
Hobby classes
Health including speech/physiotherapy Rule 35: Mental
Health
Legal aid services Rule 39:
Management
Committee
De-addiction services Rule 27: Fit
Facility
With appropriate authorities for birth
registration, identity proof and reserved/
special category certificate

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 123
The Home has established linkages with
other Child Care Institution for
rehabilitation of children with special
needs
Restoration and Rehabilitation of children
and their linkage established with-
Child Welfare Committee
Juvenile Justice Board
Child Helpline
District Child Protection Unit
District Sponsorship & Foster Care
Approval Committee
Details of adoptable children have been
uploaded on centralised database and
Section 65:
portal relating to children and prospective
Specialized
adoptive parents for the purpose of
Adoption Agency
adoption
Specialised Adoption Agency is located
in the same premises
With appropriate authorities for birth
registration, identity proof and reserved/
special category certificate
Any other Institution is also located in the
same premises
Violations
1. Violation of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and the Rules
2. (a) Violation of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
(b) If yes, whether Section 19 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 was followed?
3. Any other Violation/Observation/Remarks: None.
Interaction with Children
During the Inspection, informal interaction with the children may be held with a group of children of appropriate age
group in an open friendly environment to find out about their safety, security and protection from offence in the
Institution. The interaction may focus on education, skilling, sports, co-curricular activities. The confidentiality of the
children also needs to be ensured.
1. General Principles to Conduct the Interaction
The following General Principles has to be followed throughout the conduct of Interaction:-
(i) Confidentiality
(ii) Transparency
(iii) Participation
Keep the questions simple and general. Show that you are genuinely interested in the child/children.
2. Rapport Building and generic Conversation- Begin the discussion with a general, open-ended question about
the topic such as asking about the views about the Home that the children are staying in. The inspecting
team/officials can ask the children about the positives and negatives of the Home.
3. Discussing general issues- The inspecting team/officials should ask general questions to the children to gain their
trust and confidence. The general questions can be focussed on issues with the administration and staff, issues
faced by children while staying in the Home, how helpful are the staff of the Home, measures for reporting a
complaint and information about child protection policy in the Home.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
124 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
4. OBSERVATIONS on the interaction-
______________________________________________________________________________________
5. If any case of child abuse is observed/suspected, then it should be immediately reported as per provisions of
Section 19 of the POCSO Act.
Observations/ Remarks: ...................................................................................
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature: Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:”
67. In the principal rules, after Form 46, the following Form shall be inserted, namely:–
“FORM 46A
[Rule 21(3) and Rule 21(15)]
INSPECTION FORMAT FOR REGISTERATION AND RENEWAL OF A CHILD CARE INSTITUTION
State:
District:
Name of Institution:
Educational facility:
Type of Facility:_____________________(Children Home/Observation Home/Special Home/Place of
Safety/Open Shelter/Specialised Adoption Agency/Fit Facility)
Name and address of the Institution: …………………………
Acts/Rules Indicator Status Remarks
(Yes or (In case of No
No) Compliance or
Partial
Compliance)
I. LEGAL STATUS
Registration of the Parent Organization
under the Societies Registration Act
Registration of the
1860/The Indian Trusts Act 1882/The
Child Care
Companies Act 2013
Institutions
Registration No. of the Parent Organization
under the Societies Registration Act
1860/The Indian Trusts Act 1882/The
Companies Act 2013
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010,
Registration (if any)
II.PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Sign board displayed indicating name, type
of CCI, contact details

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 125
Boundary wall/fencing
Rule 29: Physical
Classroom
Infrastructure
Dormitories
Kitchen
Counseling
Recreation
Sick room
Library
Visitors’ room
Vocational training
Dining hall
Store
Record room
Office room
Staff Residence
Bathrooms
Toilets
Good condition of ceilings walls, floor
coverings, draperies, curtains, blinds,
furniture, fixtures, and equipment
Child friendly bathrooms / bathing areas
(1:10) available exclusively for children
Child friendly toilets (1:7) available
exclusively for children
Rule 31: Sanitation
and Hygiene Safe and purified drinking water storage is
available
Safe and purified drinking water is provided
to all children
Proper drainage and garbage disposal
facilities available
Clear guidelines regarding access of
staff/visitors in identified areas especially in
children’s dormitories/toilets
III. MANAGEMENT/ STAFFING PATTERN
1 Person in Charge
2 Counselor
3 Child Welfare Officer/ probation
Rule 26: officer/Case workers
Management and
4 House Mother/ House Father
Monitoring of Child
Care Institutions 1 Medical Officer (Physician)
1 Para medical staff
1 Store keeper cum accountant

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
126 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
1 (part time) Art and Craft cum music
teacher
1 (part time) PT instructor cum Yoga
Trainer
1 Driver
2 Cook
2 Helper
2 House Keeping
Security Guard
Any Other
Female Superintendent / Manager /In-
Charge available for girls’ unit
Rule 89: Training Training organized for the staff on - Child
of Personnel Rights Protection
Dealing with
Care Giving
Children
Rehabilitation
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015
Mission Vatsalya
Rule 76: Abuse and Training and Orientation of care givers
Exploitation of the
Training and Orientation of children
child
Rule 65: Rehabilitation-cum-Placement Officer
Rehabilitation-cum-
Placement Officer
Rule 61: Duties of Superintendent/Manager/ In-charge stay on
the Person-in- the campus
charge of a Child
Care Institution
IV. FUNCTIONALITY
Computer with internet accessibility
Records stored safely
Essential Details including- Emergency
Numbers
Duty Chart
Rule 29: Physical
Infrastructure Menu Chart
Attendance Status
Weekly Programme Schedule
Safe transport facility for children attaining
education outside the campus
Separate facilities for children from staff and
management
Facilities and support (equipment, staff,
teaching and learning materials/aids) for
children with special needs

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 127
visual needs
Intellectual needs
hearing needs
others
Rooms and dormitories is free of unstable
heavy equipment, furniture, or other items
that children could pull down on themselves
Privacy maintained in toilets and bathing
areas
Rule 67: Security
Measures Basic emergency medical care equipment
available
Special emergency medical care equipment
available
V. PREVENTION AND PROTECTION FROM ABUSE
Standard operating procedure for child
protection
Functional and accessible complaint and
grievance redressal mechanism including for
abuse prevention is in place, such as-
Rule 76: Abuse and Suggestion Box
Exploitation of the
child Child Helpline
CCTV Cameras
Children Committees
Regular Staff-Children Interface
VI. DAILY ROUTINE AND FACILITIES
Rule 32: Daily Daily routine is drawn up in consultation
Routine with the children’s committee and/or with
children’s participation or as per the need
Daily routine is on public display at
prominent places in the institution
Enough/safe toys are available and
accessible to children
Rule 38:
Recreational Enough suitably equipped outdoor space for
Facilities play is available and accessible to children
VII. NUTRITION AND RECREATION
Rule 33: Nutrition Staff is aware of the nutritional requirement
and Diet Scale of children at varying stages of development
Indoor recreation facilities are available for
children
Rule 38:
Recreational
Outdoor recreation facilities are available for
Facilities
children
Any innovative activities to develop
cooperation/ participation, resilience, etc. are
harnessed

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
128 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
VIII. CLOTHING, BEDDING HYGIENE
Rule 30: Clothing, clean, seasonal and age appropriate clothes,
Bedding, Toiletries articles and toiletries as per norms are
and other articles available
clean, seasonally appropriate mats and
sleeping materials as per norms are
available
Rule 31: Sanitation Sleeping material is cleaned /sanitized
and Hygiene regularly or before reuse as needed
Rooms are regularly fumigated, disinfected
and material provided to each child for
prevention of infection and disease
secured space to store personal belongings
is available for each child
Whether following facilities available in
Home for children:
Fans
Coolers
Air Conditioner
Heaters for Winter
IX. HEALTH CARE
Rule 34/35: Medical Nurse/paramedical staff is available in the
Care/ Mental Health Home at night
Staff is trained to provide First Aid
X. EDUCATION
Rule 36/69: To provide age appropriate education option
Education is available
Rule 37: Vocational Option for age appropriate, feasible and
Training market oriented is available
XI. RECORD MAINTENANCE
Master Admission and discharge register
Supervision register
Medical File and Medical Report
Attendance register of children and staff
Rule 77:
Maintenance of Order Book
Registers
Inquiry report file
Children’s suggestion book/file
Voucher, Cash Book, Ledger, Journal and
Annual Accounts
Grant utilization register
Stock register
Nutrition/diet register

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 129
Budget statement register
Visitors’ book
Staff movement register
Personal belonging register
Children’s movement register
XII. FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY
Details of information about the sources of
funding and that of the organisation as
whole/ separately available
Sources of Funding- Government
aid/grant
National Donors
International Donors under the
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010
Corporate Donors
Own sources
Others
Rule 53: Accounts Details of project wise Bank Account(s)
and audit of the maintained by it with A/c No, purpose,
Authority amount received including FCRA Account
available
I. RECOMMENDATION BY DISTRICT MAGISTRATE FOR REGISTRATION -
1. Details of violations or discrepancies or not as per norms observed:–
2. The district already has ________No. of Child Care Institutions (viz.,_______Children Home,
___________Observation Home, ___________Shelter Home, ____________Special Home, _ _Special
Adoption Agency) and _________ Juvenile Justice Boards, ______ Child Welfare Committees,
_________District Inspection Committees and has /does not have (tick as applicable) a requirement for
additional Child Care Institution.
3. In view of the above, the said Child Care Institution is recommended for consideration for
registration/renewal of registration.
OR
In view of the above, the said Child Care Institution is not recommended for consideration for registration /
renewal of registration. (whichever is applicable)
Sign and Stamp
(Name)
District Magistrate
District __________
State ____________
Date _____________
****”

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
130 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
68. In the principal rules, after Form 46, the following Forms shall be inserted, namely: –
“Form 47
[Rule 21A(5), (8) and (9)]
INSPECTION FORM FOR GROUP FOSTER CARE
(Fill as applicable)
Date and time of visit:
Name and designation of the officials inspecting the Home :
1. ………….
2. ………….
3. ……………
Name and address of Group Foster Care:
Name of Foster Parents: …………..
Contact No. ………………….
E-mail ID: ……………………….
Indicator Status Remarks
(Yes or No) (In case of No
Compliance or
Partial Compliance)
LEGAL STATUS
Previous registration of the facility as a Rule 21A:
Group Foster Care Registration of the
Child Care
Duration of previous registration
Institutions
Whether the registration of Group Foster If yes, specify reason
Care was cancelled at any time
Mandatory police verification of each of
the individuals has been done or not
STATUS OF CHILDREN
Sanction capacity (in numbers)
Total number of Children placed in
Institution
Number of biological children
Number of children placed under foster
care by the Child Welfare Committee
Number of children placed under foster
care without the orders of the Child
Welfare Committee
Number of siblings placed in the foster
care
Are there children in the age group of 0-5
years staying there?
(Specify number)
No. of new placements in the current
month
No. of children who have moved out in
the current month, including:

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 131
No. of children restored to family
No. of children moved in CCI
No. of children given in adoption
Number of children with special needs
placed in the foster care
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Building ( Rented or owned) Rule 29: Physical
Infrastructure
Number of rooms are sufficient for
sanctioned capacity of children
Kitchen, available or not
Recreation with television
Number of Bathrooms are sufficient for
sanctioned capacity of children
Individual beds are available and
provided to children
Children segregated according to age
group for stay
Children segregated according to gender
for stay
INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITY Rule 26:
Management and
Whether rooms are free of unstable heavy
Monitoring of
equipment, furniture, or other items that
Child Care
could harm children, or not
Institutions
Whether good condition of ceilings walls,
floor coverings, draperies, curtains,
blinds, furniture, fixtures, and equipment
Privacy maintained in toilets and bathing Rule 67: Security
areas or not Measures
Basic emergency medical care equipment
available or not
Special emergency medical care
equipment available or not
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
Enough/safe toys are available and Rule 38:
accessible to children or not Recreational
Facilities
Enough suitably equipped outdoor space
for play is available and accessible to
children or not
PREVENTION AND PROTECTION FROM ABUSE
Whether Standard operating procedure Rule 23: Foster
for child protection is in place or not Care
Whether restricting/restraining children’s
movements by binding, tying or any other
form, is practiced or not

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
132 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Whether food, rest or toilet is witheld or
not
Whether any previous cases of child
abuse, neglect, cruelty etc. reported
against the foster family or not (Give
Details)
NUTRITION
Whether Foster Family is aware of the Rule 33: Nutrition
nutritional requirement of children at and Diet Scale
varying stages of development or not
Whether meals are planned in
consultation with children or not
CLOTHING, BEDDING HYGIENE
Whether all children are provided Rule 30: Clothing,
individual, clean, seasonal and age Bedding, Toiletries
appropriate clothes, articles and toiletries and other articles
as per norms or not
Whether sleeping material is cleaned Rule 31: Sanitation
/sanitised regularly or before reuse as and Hygiene
needed or not
Rooms are regularly cleaned
Whether each child has been allocated a
secured space to store personal
belongings or not
HEALTH CARE
Whether Foster Family is trained to
provide First Aid or not
Whether Foster Family is aware of basic
medicines which would be required to be
administered to children in case of
sickness, emergencies or not
EDUCATION
Whether all children are provided with
age appropriate formal education or not
Whether all children are admitted in
school or not
Whether all children are attending and
going to school regularly or not
Whether Foster Family is able to help the
children with their education like
homework, projects, presentations or not
RECREATION
Whether indoor recreation facilities are Rule 38:
available for children or note Recreational
Facilities
Whether outdoor recreation facilities are
available for children or not

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 133
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
Group Foster Care maintains all the
relevant information of the child i.e. --
Individual case file
Social Investigation Report
Individual Care Plan
Case History
CWC Orders
Child Study Report (CSR)
Home Study Report (HSR)
Birth Certificate
Quarterly Progress Report
Health report
FINANCIAL COMPLIANCES
Details of information about the sources
of income of Foster Family is available
Foster Family has sufficient income to
provide for sanctioned capacity of foster
children
Other sources of funding
(Government/Private)
IT returns record of each of the
individuals for the last three years
INSPECTIONS
The Home has been inspected by the Rule 44:
Inspection Committee Inspection
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by the Inspection Committee
The feedback report is positive
The Home is being inspected by the Child
Welfare Committee every month
The Home has been inspected by the Section 109/Rule
National Commissions for Protection of 91: Monitoring by
Child rights/State Commissions for National/State
Protection of Child Rights Commission for
Protection of Child
Feedback was provided on the inspection
Rights
by the National Commissions for
Protection of Child rights/ State
Commissions for Protection of Child
rights
The feedback report is positive
Any improvement has taken place based
on the Inspection Reports

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
134 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
I. Violations
(a) Violation of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
If yes, whether Section 19 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 was followed:
(b) Any Other Violation/Observation/Remarks:
II. RECOMMENDATION BY DISTRICT MAGISTRATE FOR REGISTRATION
4. In view of the above, it is recommended that the said Group Foster Care is fit for providing
registration/renewal of registration and if not the case – not fit to provide registration/ renewal of registration.
Sign and Stamp
(Name)
District Magistrate
District __________
State ____________
Date_____________
FORM 48
[Rule 21(A)(7)]
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION OF GROUP FOSTER CARE
After perusal of the documents and on the basis of an inspection of the facility conducted on (date)............ the facility
is recognized as a Group Foster Care under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 with effect from..... for a period of .....years.
The Group Foster Care shall remain bound to follow the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015,
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016 and regulations framed by the appropriate
Government from time to time.
Dated this........................day of ........................20 .........................
(Signature)
(Seal)
Name and Designation……………………………………………
FORM 49
[RULE 15(4A)]
AFFIDAVIT BY THE PERSON APPLYING FOR CHAIRPERSON OR MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE
I ........................... applying for the position of Chairperson/Member of Child Welfare Committee
........................................, hereby certify that I am not barred by any of the conditions laid down in Section 27(4A) of
the Act, i.e.,
(i) I do not have any past record of violation of human rights or child rights,
(ii) I have not been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed or
has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence,
(iii) I have not been removed or dismissed from service of the Government of India or State Government or an
undertaking or corporation owned or controlled by the Government of India or State Government,
(iv) I have never indulged in child abuse or employment of child labour or immoral act or any other violation of
human rights or immoral acts, or
(v) I am not part of management of a child care institution in a District.;
2. If found otherwise by the State Government, I shall be liable for punitive action.
(Signature of the person)
Name and other particulars

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-2022-englisy.pdf ---
[ II—‍ 3(i)] ‍‍‍:‍ 135
FORM 50
[RULE 21A (2)]
DECLARATION BY THE FOSTER FAMILY/PERSONS APPLYING FOR GROUP FOSTER CARE
I/we ........................... applying for the Group Foster care hereby certify that:
(i) I/we do not have any previous conviction record.
(ii) I/we are not involved in any immoral act or in any act of child abuse or employment of child labour.
(iii) I/we have not been black listed by the Central or State Government.
2. If found otherwise by the State Government, I shall be liable for punitive action and immediate
disqualification.
(Signature of persons/foster family)
Name and other particulars”
[F. No. CW-II-11/1/2016-CW-II-Part (1)]
TRIPTI GURHA, Jt. Secy.
Note : The principal notification was published in the Gazette of India vide notification number GSR 898(E), dated
21st September, 2016.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. MANOJ KUMAR Digitally signed by MANOJ KUMAR
VERMA V D E a R te M : A 20 22.09.01 22:51:16 +05'30'

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
[To be published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part-II, section 3, sub-section (i)
New Delhi, Friday, October 26, 2007/KARTIKA 4, 1929]
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 26th day of October , 2007
Rules under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2000 (56 of 2000) (as
amended by the Amendment Act 33 of 2006) to be administered by the States
[For better implementation and administration of the provisions of the said Act in its true spirit
and substance]
G.S.R. 679(E) - WHEREAS the Constitution has, in several provisions, including clause (3) of
article 15, article 21, article 21A, clauses (1) and (2) of article 22, articles 23 and 24, clauses (e)
and (f) of article 39, article 39 A, articles 45, 47 and 51 A (k), impose on the State a primary
responsibility of ensuring that all the needs of children are met and that their basic rights are
fully protected;
AND WHEREAS, the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the General
Assembly of the United Nations on the 20th November, 1989 and ratified by India on 11th
December 1992, emphasizes conferment of rights on children, and reintegration of juveniles and
care and protection of vulnerable children, with a view to furthering their right to survival,
development, protection and participation;
AND WHEREAS, the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of
Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules) and the United Nations Rules for the Protection of
Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990) set the minimum standard to be adhered to in the
administration of juvenile justice in respect of juveniles in conflict with law;
AND WHEREAS, the United Nations Guidelines for the Prevention of Juvenile Delinquency
(Riyadh Guidelines) and all other relevant international instruments focus on the prevention of
juvenile delinquency and provide guidelines for it;
AND WHEREAS, to give effect to the provisions of the Constitution and relevant
international instruments , the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56
of 2000) as amended by the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act,
2006 (33 of 2006) was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to juveniles in conflict
with law and children in need of care and protection, by providing for proper care, protection and
treatment by catering to their developmental needs, and by adopting a child friendly approach in
the adjudication and disposition of matters in the best interest of children and for their ultimate
rehabilitation and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto, through institutional as
well as non-institutional measures enumerated under the said Act;
1

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
NOW, THEREFORE, with a view to provide for better implementation and administration of
the provisions of the said Act in its true spirit and substance, the Central Government in
pursuance of the above said provisions and in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 68 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
(56 of 2000) hereby makes the following rules and lays down the fundamental principles to be
applied in administration of juvenile justice, namely:-
CHAPTER - I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.― (1) These rules may be called the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definition.― In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires-
(a) “abandoned” means an unaccompanied and deserted child who is declared abandoned by the
Committee after due inquiry;
(b) "Act" means the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000) as
amended by the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2006 (33 of
2006);
(c) “best interest of the child” means a decision taken to ensure the physical, emotional,
intellectual, social and moral development of juvenile or child;
(d) “child friendly” means any process and interpretation, attitude, environment and treatment,
that is humane, considerate and in the best interest of the child;
(e) “community service” implies service rendered to the society by juveniles in conflict with law
in lieu of other judicial remedies and penalties, which is not degrading and dehumanizing.
Examples of this may include:
(i) cleaning a park;
(ii) getting involved with Habitat for Humanity;
(iii) serving the elderly in nursing homes;
(iv) helping out a local fire or police department;
(v) helping out at a local hospital or nursing home; and
(vi) serving disabled children.
(f) “detention” in case of juveniles in conflict with law means “protective custody” in line with
the principles of restorative justice;
2

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(g) "Form” means the form annexed to these rules;
(h) “individual care plan” is a comprehensive development plan for a juvenile or child based on
age specific and gender specific needs and the case history of the juvenile or child, prepared in
consultation with the juvenile or child, in order to restore the juvenile’s or child’s self-esteem,
dignity and self-worth and nurture him into a responsible citizen and accordingly the plan shall
address the following needs of a juvenile or a child:
(i) Health needs;
(ii) Emotional and psychological needs;
(iii) Educational and training needs;
(iv) Leisure, creativity and play;
(v) Attachments and relationships;
(vi) Protection from all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment;
(vii) Social mainstreaming; and
(viii) Follow-up post release and restoration.
(i) "institution" means an observation home, or a special home, or a children's home or a
shelter home set up, certified or recognized and registered under sections 8, 9, 34, sub-section (3)
of section 34 and section 37 of the Act respectively;
(j) "Officer-in-charge" or such other nomenclature as issued by the State Government, means a
person appointed for the control and management of the institution;
(k) “orphan” means a child who is without parents or willing and capable legal or natural
guardian;
(l) “place of safety” means any institution set up and recognized under sub-section (3) of section
12 and sub-section (1) of section 16 of the Act for juvenile in conflict with law or children;
(m) “recognised” means a person found fit by the competent authority or, an institution found fit
by the State Government on the recommendation of the competent authority as per clauses (h)
and (i) of section (2) of the Act; or, recognition of an institution or agency or voluntary
organisation by the State Government to operate as a children’s home, observation home and
special home; or a shelter home, specialised adoption agency or after care organization under
sub-section (1) of section 37, sub-section (4) of section 41 and clause (a) of section 44 of the
Act;
(n) “registered” means all institutions or agencies or voluntary organisations providing
residential care to children in need of care and protection registered under sub-section (3) of
section 34;
(o) "State Government" in relation to a Union Territory means the Administrator of that Union
Territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
3

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(p) “street and working children” means children without ostensible means of livelihood, care,
protection and support in accordance with the provisions laid down under clause (d) (1) of
section 2 of the Act;
(q) “surrendered child” means a child, who in the opinion of the Committee, is relinquished on
account of physical, emotional and social factors beyond the control of the parent or guardian;
(r) all words and expressions defined in the Act and used, but not defined in these rules, shall
have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Act.
CHAPTER - II
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF JUVENILE JUSTICE AND
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
3. Fundamental principles to be followed in administration of these rules.― (1) The
State Government, the Juvenile Justice Board, the Child Welfare Committee or other competent
authorities or agencies, as the case may be, while implementing the provisions of these rules
shall abide and be guided by the principles, specified in sub-rule (2).
(2) The following principles shall, interalia, be fundamental to the application, interpretation
and implementation of the Act and the rules made hereunder:
I. Principle of presumption of innocence:
(a) A juvenile or child or juvenile in conflict with law is presumed to be innocent of any malafide
or criminal intent up to the age of eighteen years.
(b) The juvenile’s or juvenile’s in conflict with law or child's right to presumption of innocence
shall be respected throughout the process of justice and protection, from the initial contact to
alternative care, including aftercare.
(c) Any unlawful conduct of a juvenile or a child or a juvenile in conflict with law which is done
for survival, or is due to environmental or situational factors or is done under control of adults, or
peer groups, is ought to be covered by the principles of innocence.
(d) The basic components of presumption of innocence are:
(i) Age of innocence
Age of innocence is the age below which a juvenile or child or a juvenile in conflict with law
cannot be subjected to the criminal justice system. The Beijing Rule 4(1) clearly lays down that
“the beginning of the age of criminal responsibility shall not be fixed at too low an age level
bearing in mind the facts of mental and intellectual maturity”. In consonance with this principle,
the mental and intellectual maturity of juvenile or child or a juvenile in conflict with law below
eighteen years is considered insufficient through out the world.
4

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(ii) Procedural protection of innocence
All procedural safeguards that are guaranteed by the Constitution and other statutes to the adults
and that go in to strengthen the juvenile’s or child’s right to presumption of innocence shall be
guaranteed to juveniles or the children or juveniles in conflict with law.
(iii) Provisions of Legal aid and Guardian Ad Litem
Juveniles in conflict with law have a right to be informed about the accusations against them and
a right to be legally represented. Provisions must be made for guardian ad litem, legal aid and
other such assistance through legal services at State expense. This shall also include such
juveniles right to present his case before the competent authority on his own.
II Principle of dignity and worth:
(a) Treatment that is consistent with the child’s sense of dignity and worth is a fundamental
principle of juvenile justice. This principle reflects the fundamental human right enshrined in
Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that all human beings are born free and
equal in dignity and rights. Respect of dignity includes not being humiliated, personal identity,
boundaries and space being respected, not being labeled and stigmatized, being offered
information and choices and not being blamed for their acts.
(b) The juvenile’s or child’s right to dignity and worth has to be respected and protected
throughout the entire process of dealing with the child from the first contact with law
enforcement agencies to the implementation of all measures for dealing with the child.
III. Principle of Right to be heard:
Every child’s right to express his views freely in all matters affecting his interest shall be fully
respected through every stage in the process of juvenile justice. Children’s right to be heard shall
include creation of developmentally appropriate tools and processes of interacting with the child,
promoting children’s active involvement in decisions regarding their own lives and providing
opportunities for discussion and debate.
IV. Principle of Best Interest:
(a) In all decisions taken within the context of administration of juvenile justice, the principle
of best interest of the juvenile or the juvenile in conflict with law or child shall be the primary
consideration.
(b) The principle of best interest of the juvenile or juvenile in conflict with law or child shall
mean for instance that the traditional objectives of criminal justice, retribution and repression,
must give way to rehabilitative and restorative objectives of juvenile justice.
5

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(c) This principle seeks to ensure physical, emotional, intellectual, social and moral
development of a juvenile in conflict with law or child so as to ensure the safety, well being and
permanence for each child and thus enable each child to survive and reach his or her full
potential.
V. Principle of family responsibility:
(a) The primary responsibility of bringing up children, providing care, support and protection
shall be with the biological parents. However, in exceptional situations, this responsibility may
be bestowed on willing adoptive or foster parents.
(b) All decision making for the child should involve the family of origin unless it is not in the
best interest of the child to do so.
(c) The family - biological, adoptive or foster (in that order), must be held responsible and
provide necessary care, support and protection to the juvenile or child under their care and
custody under the Act, unless the best interest measures or mandates dictate otherwise.
VI. Principle of Safety (no harm, no abuse, no neglect, no exploitation and no
maltreatment):
(a) At all stages, from the initial contact till such time he remains in contact with the care and
protection system, and thereafter, the juvenile or child or juvenile in conflict with law shall not
be subjected to any harm, abuse, neglect, maltreatment, corporal punishment or solitary or
otherwise any confinement in jails and extreme care shall be taken to avoid any harm to the
sensitivity of the juvenile or the child.
(b) The state has a greater responsibility for ensuring safety of every child in its care and
protection, without resorting to restrictive measures and processes in the name of care and
protection.
VII. Positive measures:
(a) Provisions must be made to enable positive measures that involve the full mobilization of all
possible resources, including the family, volunteers and other community groups, as well as
schools and other mainstream community institutions or processes, for the purpose of promoting
the well-being of the juvenile or child through individual care plans carefully worked out.
(b) The positive measures shall aim at reducing vulnerabilities and reducing the need for
intervention under the law, as well as effective, fair and humane dealing of the juvenile or child.
(c) The positive measures shall include avenues for health, education, relationships, livelihoods,
leisure, creativity and play.
(d) Such positive measures must facilitate the development of identity for the child and provide
them with an inclusive and enabling environment.
6

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
VIII. Principle of non-stigmatizing semantics, decisions and actions:
The non-stigmatizing semantics of the Act must be strictly adhered to, and the use of
adversarial or accusatory words, such as, arrest, remand, accused, charge sheet, trial, prosecution,
warrant, summons, conviction, inmate, delinquent, neglected, custody or jail is prohibited in the
processes pertaining to the child or juvenile in conflict with law under the Act.
IX. Principle of non-waiver of rights:
(a) No waiver of rights of the child or juvenile in conflict with law, whether by himself or the
competent authority or anyone acting or claiming to act on behalf of the juvenile or child, is
either permissible or valid.
(b) Non-exercise of a fundamental right does not amount to waiver.
X. Principle of equality and non-discrimination:
(a) There shall be no discrimination against a child or juvenile in conflict with law on the
basis of age, sex, place of birth, disability, health, status, race, ethnicity, religion, caste, cultural
practices, work, activity or behaviour of the juvenile or child or that of his parents or guardians,
or the civil and political status of the juvenile or child.
(b) Equality of access, equality of opportunity, equality in treatment under the Act shall be
guaranteed to every child or juvenile in conflict with law.
XI. Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality:
The juvenile's or child's right to privacy and confidentiality shall be protected by all
means and through all the stages of the proceedings and care and protection processes.
XII. Principle of last resort:
Institutionalization of a child or juvenile in conflict with law shall be a step of the last
resort after reasonable inquiry and that too for the minimum possible duration.
XIII. Principle of repatriation and restoration:
(a) Every juvenile or child or juvenile in conflict with law has the right to be re-united with
his family and restored back to the same socio-economic and cultural status that such juvenile or
child enjoyed before coming within the purview of the Act or becoming vulnerable to any form
of neglect, abuse or exploitation.
7

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(b) Any juvenile or child, who has lost contact with his family, shall be eligible for
protection under the Act and shall be repatriated and restored, at the earliest, to his family, unless
such repatriation and restoration is likely to be against the best interest of the juvenile or the
child.
XIV. Principle of Fresh Start:
(a) The principle of fresh start promotes new beginning for the child or juvenile in conflict
with law by ensuring erasure of his past records.
(b) The State shall seek to promote measures for dealing with children alleged or recognized
as having impinged the penal law, without resorting to judicial proceedings.
CHAPTER - III
JUVENILE IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
4. Juvenile Justice Boards.― There shall be one or more Juvenile Justice Boards in every
district, which shall be constituted by the State Government as per section 4 of the Act.
5. Composition of the Juvenile Justice Board.― (1) The Board shall consist of a
Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, as the case may be, and two
social workers of whom at least one shall be a woman, forming a bench:
Provided that the Principal Magistrate of the Board shall review the pendency of cases
before the Board and take such steps, as may be necessary in the expeditious disposal of the
cases.
(2) Every such bench shall have the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure
1973 (2 of 1974).
(3) (i) A Magistrate with special knowledge or training in child psychology or child welfare
shall be designated as the Principal Magistrate of the Board.
(ii) In case the Principal Magistrate with such special knowledge or training is not available,
then, the State Government shall provide for such short-term training in child psychology
or child welfare as it considers necessary.
(4) The two social workers, of whom at least one shall be a woman, shall be appointed by the
State Government on the recommendation of the Selection Committee set up under rule 91 of
these rules.
(5) The State Government shall provide for such training and orientation in child psychology,
child welfare, child rights, national and international standards for juvenile justice to all members
of the Board as it considers necessary, in accordance with the Integrated Child Protection
Scheme of the Central Government.
8

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
6. Tenure of the Board.― (1) The Board shall have a tenure of three years and the
appointment of members shall be co-terminus with the tenure of the Board.
(2) A social worker being a member of the Board shall be eligible for appointment for a
maximum of two consecutive terms.
(3) Any extension of the tenure of members of the Board shall be on the basis of their
performance appraisal by the District Child Protection Unit of the State Government and on the
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and the performance
appraisal of members of the Board shall necessarily assess their participation in the proceedings
of the Board and contribution in case disposal.
(4) A member may resign any time, by giving one month's advance notice in writing or may be
removed from his office as provided in sub-section (5) of section 4 of the Act.
(5) Any vacancy in the Board may be filled by appointment of another person from the panel of
names prepared by the Selection Committee, and shall hold office for the remaining term of the
Board.
7. Qualifications for Members of the Board.― (1) The social worker to be appointed as a
member of the Board shall be a person not less than 35 years of age, who has a post-graduate
degree in social work, health, education, psychology, child development or any other social
science discipline and has been actively involved and engaged in planning, implementing and
administering measures relating to child welfare for at least seven years.
(2) No person shall be considered for selection as a Member of the Board, if he, -
(a) has been convicted under any law;
(b) have ever indulged in child abuse or employment of child labour or any other human rights
violations or immoral act;
(c) is holding such other occupation that does not allow him to give necessary time and attention
to the work of the Board;
(d) does not fulfill the qualification and experience prescribed in the Act and the rules made there
under and in such a case the Selection Committee shall after due inquiry and on establishment of
such fact, reject his application and recommend the name of the next person from the list of
names prepared for filling the vacancies.
8. Sitting and conveyance allowances.― The social worker members of the Board shall be
paid such travel and sitting allowance, as the State Government may determine, but it shall not
be less than rupees five hundred per sitting.
9

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
9. Sittings of the Board.― (1) The Board shall hold its sittings in the premises of an
Observation Home or, at a place in proximity to the observation home or, at a suitable premise in
any institution run under the Act, and in no circumstances shall the Board operate from within
any court premises.
(2) The premises where the Board holds its sittings shall be child-friendly and shall not look like
a court room in any manner whatsoever; for example, the Board shall not sit on a raised platform
and the sitting arrangement shall be uniform, and there shall be no witness boxes.
(3) The Board shall meet on all working days of a week, unless the case pendency is less in a
particular district and concerned authority issues an order in this regard.
(4) A minimum of three-fourth attendance of the Chairperson and Members of the Board is
necessary in a year.
(5) Every member of the Board shall attend a minimum of five hours per sitting.
10. Functions of the Board.― The Board shall perform the following functions to achieve
the objectives of the Act, namely:-
(a) adjudicate and dispose cases of juveniles in conflict with law;
(b) take cognizance of crimes committed under section 23 to 28 of the Act;
(c) monitoring institutions for juveniles in conflict with law and seeking compliance from
them in cases of any noticeable lapses and improvement based on suggestions of the
Board;
(d) deal with non-compliance on the part of concerned government functionaries or
functionaries of voluntary organizations, as the case may be, in accordance with due
process of law;
(e) pass necessary direction to the district authority and police to create or provide
necessary infrastructure or facilities so that minimum standards of justice and treatment
are maintained in the spirit of the Act;
(f) maintain liaison with the Committee in respect of cases needing care and protection;
(g) liaison with Boards in other districts to facilitate speedy inquiry and disposal of cases
through due process of law;
(h) take suitable action for dealing with unforeseen situations that may arise in the
implementation of the Act and remove such difficulties in the best interest of the juvenile;
(i) send quarterly information about juveniles in conflict with law produced before them, to
the District, State Child Protection Unit, the State Government and also to the Chief
Judicial Magistrate or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for review under sub-section (2) of
section 14 of the Act;
(j) any other function assigned by the State Government from time to time relating with
juveniles in conflict with law.
11. Pre and Post-Production action of police and other agencies.― (1) As soon as a
juvenile alleged to be in conflict with law is apprehended by the police, the concerned police
officer shall inform:
10

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(a) the designated Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer in the nearest police station to
take charge of the matter;
(b) the parents or guardian of the juvenile alleged to be in conflict with law about the
apprehension of the juvenile, about the address of the Board where the juvenile will
be produced and the date and time when the parents or guardian need to be present
before the Board;
(c) the concerned probation officer, of such apprehension to enable him to obtain
information regarding social background of the juvenile and other material
circumstances likely to be of assistance to the Board for conducting the inquiry.
(2) Soon after apprehension, the juvenile shall be placed under the charge of the Juvenile or
Child Welfare Officer from the nearest police station, who shall produce the juvenile before the
Board within twenty four hours as per sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Act and where such
Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer has not been designated as per provisions laid down under
sub-section (2) of section 63 of the Act or is not available for some official reasons, the police
officer who had apprehended the juvenile shall produce him before the Board.
(3) The police apprehending a juvenile in conflict with law shall in no case send the juvenile in
lock-up or delay his charge being transferred to the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from
the nearest police station, if such an officer has been designated.
(4) A list of all designated Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officers in a district and members of
Special Juvenile Police Unit with contact details shall be prominently displayed in every police
station.
(5) For gathering the best available information it shall be incumbent upon the Police or the
Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the nearest police station, to contact the parents or
guardians of the juvenile and also apprise them of the juvenile`s law breaking behaviour.
(6) The police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the nearest police station, shall
also record the social background of the juvenile and circumstances of apprehension and offence
alleged to have been committed in the case diary of each juvenile, which shall be forwarded to
the Board forthwith.
(7) The police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the nearest police station, shall
exercise the power of apprehending the juvenile only in cases of his alleged involvement in
serious offences (entailing a punishment of more than 7 years imprisonment for adults).
(8) In such cases where apprehension apparently seems to be in the interest of the juvenile, the
police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the nearest police station, shall rather
treat the juvenile as a child in need of care and protection and produce him before the Board,
clearly explaining the juvenile’s need for care and protection in its report and seek appropriate
orders from the Board under rule 13 (1) (b) of these rules.
11

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(9) For all other cases involving offences of non-serious nature (entailing a punishment of less
than 7 years imprisonment for adults) and cases where apprehension is not necessary in the
interest of the juvenile, the police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the nearest
police station, shall intimate the parents or guardian of the juvenile about forwarding the
information regarding nature of offence alleged to be committed by their child or ward along
with his socio-economic background to the Board, which shall have the power to call the
juvenile for subsequent hearings.
(10) In case the Board is not sitting, the juvenile in conflict with law shall be produced before the
single member of the Board as per the provisions laid down under the sub-section (2) of section
5 of the Act.
(11) In dealing with cases of juveniles in conflict with law the Police or the Juvenile or the Child
Welfare Officer from the nearest police station, shall not be required to register an FIR or file a
charge-sheet, except where the offence alleged to have been committed by the juvenile is of a
serious nature such as rape, murder or when such offence is alleged to have been committed
jointly with adults; instead, in matters involving simple offences, the Police or the Juvenile or the
Child Welfare Officer from the nearest police station shall record information regarding the
offence alleged to have been committed by the juvenile in the general daily diary followed by a
report containing social background of the juvenile and circumstances of apprehension and the
alleged offence and forward it to the Board before the first hearing.
(12) The State Government shall recognize only such voluntary organizations that are in a
position to provide the services of probation, counseling, case work, a safe place and also
associate with the Police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the Special Juvenile
Police Unit, and have the capacity, facilities and expertise to do so as protection agencies that
may assist the Police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the police at the time of
apprehension, in preparation of the report containing social background of the juvenile and
circumstances of apprehension and the alleged offence, in taking charge of the juvenile until
production before the Board, and in actual production of the juvenile before the Board within
twenty-four hours.
(13) The Police or the Juvenile or the Child Welfare Officer from the Special Juvenile Police
Unit, or the recognized voluntary organization shall be responsible for the safety and provision
of food and basic amenities to the juveniles apprehended or kept under their charge during the
period such juveniles are with them.
(14) When a juvenile is produced before an individual member of the Board, and an order
obtained, such order shall need ratification by the Board in its next meeting.
12. Procedure to be followed in determination of Age.― (1) In every case concerning a
child or a juvenile in conflict with law, the court or the Board or as the case may be the
Committee referred to in rule 19 of these rules shall determine the age of such juvenile or
child or a juvenile in conflict with law within a period of thirty days from the date of making of
the application for that purpose.
12

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(2) The court or the Board or as the case may be the Committee shall decide the juvenility or
otherwise of the juvenile or the child or as the case may be the juvenile in conflict with law,
prima facie on the basis of physical appearance or documents, if available, and send him to the
observation home or in jail.
(3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile in conflict with law, the age determination
inquiry shall be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee by
seeking evidence by obtaining –
(a) (i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if available; and in the absence
whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school (other than a play school) first
attended; and in the absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a
panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of clause (a) above, the medical
opinion will be sought from a duly constituted Medical Board, which will declare the age
of the juvenile or child. In case exact assessment of the age cannot be done, the Court or
the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee, for the reasons to be recorded by them,
may, if considered necessary, give benefit to the child or juvenile by considering his/her
age on lower side within the margin of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case shall, after taking into consideration such evidence as may
be available, or the medical opinion, as the case may be, record a finding in respect of his age
and either of the evidence specified in any of the clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii) or in the absence
whereof, clause (b) shall be the conclusive proof of the age as regards such child or the juvenile
in conflict with law.
(4) If the age of a juvenile or child or the juvenile in conflict with law is found to be below 18
years on the date of offence, on the basis of any of the conclusive proof specified in sub-rule (3),
the court or the Board or as the case may be the Committee shall in writing pass an order stating
the age and declaring the status of juvenility or otherwise, for the purpose of the Act and these
rules and a copy of the order shall be given to such juvenile or the person concerned.
(5) Save and except where, further inquiry or otherwise is required, inter alia, in terms of section
7A, section 64 of the Act and these rules, no further inquiry shall be conducted by the court or
the Board after examining and obtaining the certificate or any other documentary proof referred
to in sub-rule (3) of this rule.
(6) The provisions contained in this rule shall also apply to those disposed off cases, where the
status of juvenility has not been determined in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-
rule(3) and the Act, requiring dispensation of the sentence under the Act for passing appropriate
order in the interest of the juvenile in conflict with law.
13

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
13. Post-production processes by the Board.― (1) On production of the juvenile before
the Board, the report containing social background of the juvenile and circumstances of
apprehension and offence alleged to have been committed provided by the officers, individuals,
agencies producing the juvenile shall be reviewed by the Board, and the Board shall pass the
following order in the first summary inquiry on the same day, namely:-
(a) dispose off the case, if the evidence of his conflict with law appears to be unfounded or
where the juvenile is involved in trivial law breaking;
(b) transfer to the Committee, matters concerning juveniles clearly stated to be in need of
care and protection in the police report submitted to the Board at the time of production
of the juvenile;
(c) release the juvenile in the supervision or custody of fit persons or fit institutions or
probation officers as the case may be, through an order in Form-I, with a direction to
appear or present a juvenile for an inquiry on a next date;
(d) detain the juvenile in an Observation Home or fit institution pending inquiry, only in
cases of juvenile’s involvement in serious offences as per an order in Form-II;
(e) in all cases of release pending inquiry, the Board shall notify the next date of hearing, not
later than 15 days of the first summary enquiry and also seek social investigation report
from the concerned Probation Officer through an order in Form-III;
(2) The Board shall take the following steps to ensure fair and speedy inquiry, namely:-
(a) at the time of initiating the inquiry, the Board shall satisfy itself that the juvenile in
conflict with law has not been subjected to any ill-treatment by the police or by any other
person, including a lawyer or probation officer and take corrective steps in case of such
ill-treatment;
(b) in all cases under the Act the proceedings shall be conducted in as simple a manner as
possible and care shall be taken to ensure that the juvenile, against whom the proceedings
have been instituted, is given child-friendly atmosphere during the proceedings;
(c) every juvenile brought before the Board shall be given the opportunity to be heard and
participate in his inquiry;
(d) cases of petty offences, if not disposed off by the Special Juvenile Police Unit or at the
police station itself, may be disposed off by the Board through summary proceedings or
inquiry, while in cases of heinous offences entailing punishment of 7 years or more, due
process of inquiry in detail may follow;
(e) even in cases of inquiry pertaining to serious offences the Board shall follow the
procedure of trial in summons cases.
(3) When witnesses are produced for examination in inquiry relating to a juvenile in conflict with
law, the Board shall keep in mind that the inquiry is not to be conducted in the spirit of strict
adversarial proceedings and it shall use the powers conferred by section 165 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) so as to question the juvenile and proceed with the presumptions
that favour the juvenile’s right to be restored.
(4) While examining a juvenile in conflict with law and recording his statement, the Board shall
address the juvenile in a child-friendly manner in order to put the juvenile at ease and to
14

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
encourage him to state the facts and circumstances without any fear, not only in respect of the
offence of which the juvenile is accused, but also in respect of the home and social surroundings
and the influence to which the juvenile might have been subjected.
(5) The Board may take into account the report of the police containing circumstances of
apprehension and offence alleged to have been committed and the social investigation report in
Form-IV prepared by the Probation officer or the voluntary organization on the orders of the
Board as per Form-III, along with the evidence produced by the parties for arriving at a
conclusion about the juvenile.
(6) Every inquiry by the Board shall be completed within a period of four months after the first
summary inquiry and only in exceptional cases involving trans-national criminality, large
number of accused and inordinate delay in production of witnesses, the period of inquiry may be
extended by two months on recording of reasons by the Board.
(7) In all other cases except where the nature of alleged offence is serious, delay beyond four to
six months shall lead to the termination of the proceedings.
(8) Where the proceedings are delayed beyond six months on account of serious nature of the
offence alleged to have been committed by the juvenile, the Board shall send a periodic report of
the case to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate stating the reason for
delay as well as steps being taken to expedite the matter.
14. Legal Aid.― (1) The proceedings before the Board shall be conducted in non-
adversarial environment, but with due regard to all the due process guarantees such as right to
counsel and free legal aid.
(2) The Board shall ensure that the Legal Officer in the District Child Protection Unit and the
State Legal Aid Services Authority shall extend free legal services to all the juvenile in conflict
with law.
(3) The Legal Officer in the District Child Protection Unit and the State Legal Aid Services
Authority shall be under an obligation to provide legal services sought by the Board.
(4) In the event of shortfall in the State Legal Aid Services support, the Board shall be
responsible for seeking legal services from recognized voluntary legal services organisations or
the university legal services clinics.
(5) The Board may also deploy the services of the student legal services volunteers and non-
governmental organisation volunteers in para-legal tasks such as contacting the parents of
juveniles in conflict with law and gathering relevant social and rehabilitative information about
the juveniles.
15. Completion of Inquiry and Dispositional Alternatives.― (1) The Board shall complete
every inquiry within the stipulated time of four months and on recording a finding about
15

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
juvenile’s involvement in the alleged offence, pass one of the seven dispositional orders
enumerated in section 15 of the Act.
(2) Before passing an order, the Board shall obtain a social investigation report prepared by the
probation officer or by a recognized voluntary organization ordered to do so by the Board, and
take the findings of the report into account.
(3) All dispositional orders passed by the Board shall necessarily include an individual care plan
for the concerned juvenile in conflict with law, prepared by a probation officer or voluntary
organization on the basis of interaction with the juvenile and his family where possible.
(4) Where the Board decides to release the juvenile after advice and admonition or after
participation in group counseling or orders him to perform community service, necessary
direction may also be made by the Board to the District or State Child Protection Unit or the
State Government for arranging such individual counselling, group counseling and community
service.
(5) Where the Board decides to release the juvenile in conflict with law on probation and place
him under the care of the parent or guardian or fit person, the person in whose custody the
juvenile is released may be required to submit a written undertaking in Form-V for the good
behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for a maximum period of three years.
(6) The Board may order release of a juvenile in conflict with law on execution of a personal
bond without surety in Form VI.
(7) In the event of placement of a juvenile in conflict with law in care of a fit institution or
special home, the Board shall keep in mind that the fit institution or special home is located
nearest to the place of residence of the juvenile’s parent or guardian.
(8) The Board, where it releases a juvenile in conflict with law on probation and places him
under the care of parent or guardian or fit person or where the juvenile is released on probation
and placed under the care of fit institution, may order that the juvenile be placed under the
supervision of a probation officer. The period of supervision shall be a maximum of three years.
(9) Where the Board decides that a juvenile in conflict with law ought to be treated as a child in
need of care and protection, it shall make necessary orders for production of such juvenile before
the nearest Committee for suitable care, protection and rehabilitation.
(10)Where it appears to the Board that the juvenile in conflict with law has not complied with
probation conditions, it may order the juvenile to be sent for detention in a special home.
(11) Where a juvenile in conflict with law who has attained the age of sixteen years and the
offence committed by him is of such a serious nature that in the satisfaction of
the Board, it is neither in the interest of the juvenile himself nor in the interest of other juveniles
of the special home, the Board may order the juvenile to be kept in a place of safety and in a
manner considered most appropriate by it.
16

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(12) The State Government shall make arrangement for complying with the detention of special
category of juveniles in conflict with law in place of safety other than the special home.
(13) In no case the period of detention shall exceed beyond the maximum period provided in
clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 15 of the Act.
16. Institutions for juveniles in conflict with law.― (1) The State Government or the
voluntary organisation recognised by that State Government shall set up separate observation
homes or special homes for boys and girls.
(2) The observation homes or special homes shall set up separate residential facilities for
boys and girls up to 12 years, 13-15 years and 16 years and above.
(3) Every institution shall keep a copy of the Act, the rules made by the Central Government
and the State rules if any, for use by both staff, juveniles and children residing therein.
(4) The State Governments in collaboration with civil society shall develop and make
available simplified and child friendly versions of the Act and the rules in regional languages.
(5) All facilities and services for juveniles in conflict with law shall be made available and
maintained as per the provisions of the Act and the State rules. In case the State rules have not
been notified, the provisions of these rules shall apply.
17. Release.― (1) The Officer-in-charge shall maintain a roster of the cases of juveniles in
conflict with law to be released on the expiry of the period of stay as ordered by the Board.
(2) Each case shall be placed before the Management Committee set up under rule 55 of
these rules by the concerned probation officer or child welfare officer or case worker for
ensuring proper release and social mainstreaming of the juvenile post-release.
(3) The release shall be as per the pre-release and post-release plan prepared under the
individual care plan and reviewed from time to time by the management committee set up under
rule 55 of these rules and in all cases of release, necessary action and preparation shall be
initiated well before the time of release and shall include preparation for post-release follow-up.
(4) The timely information of the release of a juvenile and of the exact date of release shall
be given to the parent or guardian and the parent or guardian shall be invited to come to the
institution to take charge of the juvenile on that date.
(5) If necessary, the actual expenses of the parent's or guardian's journey both ways and of
the juvenile's journey from the institution shall be paid to the parent or guardian by the Officer-
in-charge at the time of the release of the juvenile.
17

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(6) If the parent or guardian, as the case may be, fails to come and take charge of the juvenile
on the appointed date, the juvenile shall be taken by the escort of the institution; and in case of a
girl, she shall be escorted by a female escort.
(7) At the time of release or discharge, a juvenile shall be provided with a set of summer or
winter clothing and essential toiletries, if the Officer-in-charge considers it necessary.
(8) If the juvenile has no parent or guardian, he may be sent to an aftercare organization, or
in the event of his employment, to the person who has undertaken to employ the juvenile.
(9) The Officer-in-charge of a girls' institution may, subject to the consent of the girl and the
approval of the competent authority, help the girl with her social re-integration by way of
sending a girl above the age of eighteen years to an after care programme or, helping her with
some vocation or gainful employment or, helping her settle into family life according to the
procedure laid down by the competent authority from time to time.
(10) The Officer-in-Charge shall order the discharge in Form-VII of any juvenile whose
detention period has come to an end and inform the competent authority within seven days of the
action taken and if the date of release falls on a Sunday or a public holiday, the juvenile may be
discharged on the preceding day with an entry to that effect being made in the register of
discharge.
(11) The Officer-in-charge shall in appropriate cases, order the payment of subsistence
money, at such rates as may be fixed from time to time, by the State or the District Child
Protection Unit or the State Government, and the railway or road, or both, fares, as the case may
be.
(12) In deserving cases, the Officer-in-charge may provide the juvenile with such small tools,
as may be necessary, to start a work or business subject to such maximum cost as may be fixed
by the institution which shall also form part of the post-release plan.
(13) Where a girl has no place to go after release and requests for stay in the institution after
the period of her stay is over, the Officer-in-charge may, subject to the approval of the
competent authority, allow her stay till the time some other suitable arrangements are made.
18. Procedure to be followed in respect of sections 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 of the Act.―
(1) In the event of violation of provisions laid down under section 21 of the Act,-
(a) the Board shall take cognizance of such violation by print or electronic media and shall
initiate necessary inquiry and pass appropriate orders as per provisions contained in sub-
section (2) of section 21 of the Act; and
(b) where the National or the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights takes suo
motu cognizance of violation under section 21 of the Act, it shall inform the District or the
State Child Protection Unit of the concerned district and the State directing them to initiate
necessary action through the Board.
18

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(2) In the event of an escape of a juvenile in conflict with law or a child, the following action
shall be taken within twenty-four hours,-
(a) the Officer-in-Charge of any institution shall immediately send a report to the area
Police Station or Special Juvenile Police Unit along with the details and description of the
juvenile or child, with identification marks and a photograph, with a copy to the Board,
District Child Protection Unit and other authorities concerned;
(b) the Officer-in--charge of institutions other than shelter homes or drop-in-centres shall
send the guards or concerned staff in search of the juvenile, at places like railway
stations, bus stands and other places where the juvenile is likely to go;
(c) the parents or guardians shall be informed immediately about such escape; and
(d) the Officer-in-charge of an institution other than a shelter home or drop-in-centre
shall hold an inquiry about such escape and send his report to the Board or Committee
and the authorities concerned and the report shall be placed before the Management
Committee set up under rule 55 of these rules in the next meeting for review.
(3) The offences against a juvenile in conflict with law or a child specified in sections 23, 24,
25 and 26 shall be either bailable or non-bailable besides being cognizable under the provisions
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the procedures shall apply on the
Police, the Board and the concerned authorities and functionaries accordingly.
CHAPTER IV
CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
19. Child Welfare Committee.― There shall be a Child Welfare Committee in every
district, which shall be constituted by the State Government through a notification in the Official
Gazette as per sub-section (1) of section 29 of the Act.
20. Composition of the Child Welfare Committee.― (1) The Committee shall consist of a
Chairperson and four other members, of whom at least one shall be a woman.
(2) The Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be appointed on the recommendation
of a Selection Committee set up by the State Government, for the purpose under rule 91.
(3) The Selection Committee, while selecting the Chairperson and Members of the Committee,
shall as far as possible ensure that none of them are from any adoption agency.
(4) The State Government shall provide for such training and orientation in child psychology,
child welfare, child rights, national and international standards for juvenile justice to all
members of the Committee as it considers necessary.
19

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
21. Tenure of the Committee.― (1) The Committee shall have a tenure of three years and
the tenure of Chairperson and Members shall be co-terminus with the tenure of the Committee.
(2) The Chairperson and Members of the Committee shall be eligible for appointment for a
maximum of two consecutive terms.
(3) Extension of the tenure of members of the Committee shall be on the basis of their
performance appraisal by the District Child Protection Unit or the State Government and on the
recommendation of the Selection Committee.
(4) With a view to ensuring continuity on completion of the tenure of a Committee, the State
Government shall constitute a new Committee before the expiry of the term of the existing
Committee; where after the existing Committee shall handover all records and information to the
newly formed Committee.
(5) The Chairperson and Members may resign at any time by giving one month's notice in
writing or may be removed from office as provided in sub-section (4) of section 29 of the Act.
(6) Any casual vacancy in the Committee may be filled by appointment of another person from
the panel of names prepared by the Selection Committee, and shall hold office for the remaining
term of the Committee.
22. Qualifications for Chairperson and Members of the Committee.― (1) A person to be
selected as a Chairperson or Member of the Committee shall have either of the following
qualifications, in addition to a minimum of seven years experience in their respective field:
(i) a person with post graduate degree in social work, psychology, child development,
education, sociology, law, criminology and, where such a person is not available, a
person with at least a graduate degree in any of the social science disciplines;
(ii) a teacher, doctor or a social worker who has been involved in work concerning children.
(2) The Chairperson or Member of the Committee shall be a person not less than 35 years of age.
(3) No person shall be considered for Selection as a Chairperson or Member of the Committee,
if he,-
(i) has a previous conviction record;
(ii) has been involved in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child
labour;
(iii) is holding such full-time occupation that may not allow him to give necessary time and
attention to the work of the Committee as per the Act and these rules;
(iv) does not fulfill the qualification and experience prescribed in the Act and the rules made
thereunder, and in such a case the Selection Committee shall after due inquiry and on
establishment of such fact, reject his application and recommend the name of the next
person from the list of names prepared for filling the vacancies.
20

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
23. Sitting and conveyance allowances.― The Chairperson and Members of the Committee
shall be paid such travel and sitting allowance, as the State Government may determine, but it
shall not be less than rupees five hundred per sitting per member.
24. Sitting of the Committee.― (1) The Committee shall hold its sittings in the premises
of the children’s home or, at a place in proximity to the children’s home or, at a suitable premise
in any institution run under the Act.
(2) On receiving information about child or children in need of care and protection, if
circumstances are such that the child or children cannot be produced before the Committee, the
Committee may move out to reach the child or children and hold its sitting at a place that is
convenient for such child or children.
(3) The premises where the Committee holds its sittings shall be child-friendly and shall not
look like a court room in any manner whatsoever; for example, the Committee shall not sit on a
raised platform and the sitting arrangement shall be uniform and there shall be no witness boxes.
(4) The Committee shall meet a minimum of three days a week, which may be extended by
the State Government depending on case and pendency of work.
(5) A minimum of three-fourth attendance of the Chairperson and Members of the
Committee is necessary in a year.
(6) The duration of a sitting is dependent on the pendency of work before the Committee.
(7) Every member of the Committee shall attend a minimum of four hours per sitting.
25. Functions and Powers of the Committee.― The Committee shall perform the
following functions to achieve the objectives of the Act, namely:-
(a) take cognizance of and receive children produced before the Committee;
(b) decide on the matters brought before the Committee;
(c) reach out to such children in need of care and protection who are not in a position to be
produced before the Committee, being in difficult circumstances, with support from the
District Child Protection Unit or State Child Protection Unit or the State Government;
(d) conduct necessary inquiry on all issues relating to and affecting the safety and well being of
the child;
(e) direct the Child Welfare Officers or Probation Officers or non-governmental organisations to
conduct social inquiry and submit a report to the Committee;
(f) ensure necessary care and protection, including immediate shelter;
(g) ensure appropriate rehabilitation and restoration, including passing necessary directions to
parents or guardians or fit persons or fit institutions in this regard, in addition to follow-up
and coordination with District Child Protection Unit or State Adoption Resource Agency and
other agencies;
21

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(h) direct the Officer-in-charge of children’s homes to receive children requiring shelter and
care;
(i) document and maintain detailed case record along with a case summary of every case dealt
by the Committee;
(j) provide a child-friendly environment for children;
(k) recommend ‘fit institutions’ to the State Government for the care and protection of children;
(l) declare ‘fit persons’;
(m) declare a child legally free for adoption;
(n) keep information about and take necessary follow-up action in respect of missing children in
their jurisdiction;
(o) maintain liaison with the Board in respect of cases needing care and protection;
(p) visit each institution where children are sent for care and protection or adoption at least once
in three months to review the condition of children in institutions, with support of the State
Government and suggest necessary action;
(q) monitor associations and agencies within their jurisdiction that deal with children in order to
check on the exploitation and abuse of children;
(r) co-ordinate with the Police, Labour Department and other agencies involved in the care and
protection of children with the support of District Child Protection Unit or State Child
Protection Unit or State Government;
(s) liaison and network with the corporate sector and non-governmental organisations for any of
the above, including for social inquiry, restoration and rehabilitation, as and when required;
and
(t) maintain a suggestion box to encourage inputs from children and adults alike and take
necessary action.
26. Procedure in relation to Committee.― (1) The quorum for the meeting shall be three
members attending, which may include the Chairperson.
(2) Any decision taken by an individual member, when the Committee is not sitting, shall require
ratification by the Committee in its next sitting.
(3) The Committee shall take into consideration the age, developmental stage, physical and
mental health, opinion of the child and the recommendation of the child welfare officer or
caseworker, prior to disposal of cases.
(4) For final disposal of a case, the order of the Committee shall be signed by at least two
members, including the Chairperson.
27. Production of a Child before the Committee.― (1) A child in need of care and
protection shall be produced before the Committee within twenty-four hours, excluding journey
time, by one of the following persons-
(a) any police officer or Special Juvenile Police Unit or a designated police officer;
(b) any public servant;
(c) childline, a registered voluntary organization or by such other voluntary organization
or an agency as may be recognized by the State Government;
22

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(d) social worker;
(e) any public spirited citizen; or
(f) by the child himself.
(2) In case of a child under two years of age, who is medically unfit, the person or the
organization shall send a written report along with the photograph of the child to the Committee
within twenty-four hours and produce the child before the Committee as soon as the child is
medically fit along with a medical certificate to that effect.
(3) The Committee can suo motu take cognizance of cases brought to their notice and reach out
to a child in need of care and protection where necessary and the District or the State Child
Protection Unit or the State Government shall provide necessary support and assistance to the
Committee for carrying out such functions.
(4) In case the Committee is not sitting, the child may be produced before the single member of
the Committee as per the provisions laid down under the sub-section (2) of section 30 of the Act
for being placed in safe custody of parent or guardian or fit person or fit institutions, as the case
may be, till such time that the child can be produced before the Committee.
(5) In case the single member is also not accessible, or that the hours are odd, the child shall be
taken by an non-governmental organisation or Childline or Police to an appropriate institution
for children registered under the Act with all the necessary documents, and placed in such
institution till the time of production before the Committee.
(6) The concerned institution shall inform the Chairperson or a member of the Committee about
such child and produce the child before the Committee within twenty four hours and in such
cases, it may not be necessary for the person who brings a child in need of care and protection to
an institution to be present at the time of production of the child before the Committee.
(7) Whoever produces a child before the Committee shall submit a report on the circumstances
under which the child came to their notice and efforts made by them on informing the police and
the missing persons squad and in cases where a recognized voluntary organization or any police
personnel produce a child before the Committee, they shall also submit a report on the efforts
made by them for tracing the family of the child.
(8) Any general medical or gynecological examination of children shall not be a pre-requisite for
production of the child before the Committee or admission in an institution.
(9) The Committee shall facilitate the filing of a police complaint and First Information Report in
cases of missing children as well as matters of violence, exploitation and abuse of children and
arrange for required legal aid through the Legal Officer in the District Child Protection Unit or
District or State Legal Aid Services Authority or voluntary organisations.
(10) Each Committee shall send quarterly information about children in need of care and
protection received by them to the District or State Child Protection Unit or State Government.
23

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(11) Children shall be provided a child-friendly environment during the proceedings of the
Committee.
(12) The Committee shall have an empanelled list of lawyers, social workers and mental health
expert who may assist the Committee in dealing with cases of abused children and who may also
interface with the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor to facilitate legal services to
the abused children, when the cases relating to such children are taken up in regular criminal
courts.
(13) Every possible effort shall be made to trace the family with support from the District Child
Protection Unit, and assistance of recognized voluntary organizations, childline or police may
also be taken.
(14) The Committee shall send the child to the designated place of safety, with age and gender
appropriate facilities, pending inquiry and in such eventuality, the District Child Protection Unit
or State Child Protection Unit or State Government shall provide transport or make necessary
budgetary allocations for such expenses based on the actual fare.
(15) The child may be escorted by the police officer or representative of the voluntary
organization or by any other arrangement as considered appropriate by the Committee with
support from the District Child Protection Unit and in case of a girl child, a female escort shall
accompany the child.
(16) A list of all recognized child care institutions along with their capacity and appropriate
facilities as prescribed under section 34 of the Act, a list of all child related resource services and
a list of contact details of all Child Welfare Committees across the country shall be provided to
the Committee by the District Child Protection Unit or State Government.
(17) The Committee may, while making an order in Form VIII placing a child under the care
of a parent, guardian or fit person pending inquiry or at the time of restoration, as the case may
be, direct such parent, guardian or fit person to enter into an undertaking in Form IX.
(18) Whenever the Committee orders a child to be kept in an institution, it shall forward to the
Officer-in-charge of such institution a copy of the order of short term placement pending inquiry,
in Form X with particulars of the home and parents or guardian and previous record.
(19) Whenever the Committee orders a child to be kept in a fit institution as part of restoration
under clause (f) of sub- section (3) of section 39 of the Act, it shall forward a copy of its order
of restoration in Form XI to the Officer-in-charge of such institution.
(20) The child shall be placed in an institution closest to where his parents or guardians belong
as far as possible, unless the child has been subjected to abuse or exploitation by parents or
guardians.
28. Procedure for inquiry.― (1) When a child is brought before the Committee, the
Committee shall assign the case to a social worker or caseworker or child welfare officer or
24

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Officer-in-charge as the case may be, of the institution or any recognized agency for conducting
the inquiry through an order in Form-XII.
(2) The Committee shall direct the concerned person or organization about the details or
particulars to be enquired into for developing an individual care plan and suitable rehabilitation.
(3) All inquiries conducted by a social worker or caseworker or child welfare officer or Officer-
in-charge of the institution or any recognized agency shall be as per Form-XIII and must
provide an assessment of the family situation of the child in detail, and explain in writing
whether it will be in the best interest of the child to restore him to his family.
(4) The inquiry must be completed within four months or within such shorter period as may be
fixed by the Committee:
Provided that the Committee may, in the best interest of the child and for the reasons to
be recorded in writing, extend the said period under special circumstances.
(5) After completion of the inquiry, if, the child is under orders to continue in the children's
home, the Committee shall direct the Officer-in-charge of the home to submit quarterly progress
report of such child and produce the child before the Committee for an annual review of the
progress.
29. Children's Homes.― (1) The State Government itself or in association with voluntary
organizations, shall set up separate homes for children in need of care and protection, in the
manner specified below-
(a) all children’s homes shall be registered as child care institutions under sub-section (3) of
section 34 of the Act and rule 71 of these rules;
(b) all children’s homes shall be certified as per the procedure laid down in rule 70;
(c) all children’s homes shall report to the concerned Committee about every child in need of
care and protection received by them;
(d) children of both sexes below ten years may be kept in the same home but separate
facilities shall be maintained for boys and girls in the age group 5 to 10 years;
(e) every children’s home shall include separate facilities for children in the age group of 0-5
years with appropriate facilities for the infants;
(f) separate children's homes shall be set up for boys and girls in the age group 10 to 18
years;
(g) children in the age group of 10 to 18 shall be further segregated into two groups of 10 to
15 years and 15 to 18 years.
(2) Each children home shall be a comprehensive child care center with the primary objective to
promote an integrated approach to child care by involving the community and local Non-
Governmental Organisations through the Management Committee set up under rule 55 of these
rules and the District Child Protection Unit or State Child Protection Unit or the State
Government shall make an annual performance review of functioning of the children’s homes.
25

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(3) The activities of such centre shall focus on:
(a) preparing and following individual care plans for every child, with rights based approach,
specifically addressing the child’s physical and mental health, emotional needs,
education, skill development, protection and special needs if any;
(b) family based non-institutional services, such as, foster family care, adoption and
sponsorship;
(c) specialized services in situations of conflict or disaster and for juvenile or children
affected by terminal or incurable disease to prevent neglect by providing family
counselling, nutrition, health interventions, psycho-social interventions and sponsorship;
(d) emergency outreach service through childline ( Toll free Help Line No. 1098);
(e) linkages with Integrated Child Development Services to cater to the needs of children
below six years;
(f) linkages with organizations and individuals who can provide support services to children;
and
(g) opportunities to volunteers willing to provide various services for children.
30. Shelter Homes.― (1) For children in urgent need of care and protection, such as street
children and run-away children, the State Government shall support creation of requisite number
of shelter homes or drop-in- centres through the voluntary organizations.
(2) Shelter homes shall include:
(g) short-stay homes for children needing temporary shelter, care and protection for a
maximum period of one year,
(h) transitional homes providing immediate care and protection to a child for a
maximum period of four months,
(i) 24 hour drop-in-centres for children needing day care or night shelter facility.
(3) The shelter homes or drop-in-centres shall have the minimum facilities of boarding and
lodging, besides the provision for fulfillment of basic needs in terms of clothing, food, health
care and nutrition, safe drinking water and sanitation.
(4) There shall be separate shelter homes for girls and boys as per rule 40(2)(d) of these rules.
(5) All shelter homes shall provide requisite facilities for education, vocational training,
counselling and recreation or make arrangements for it in collaboration with voluntary
organizations or corporate sector.
(6) The Committee, Special Juvenile Police Units, public servants, Childlines, voluntary
organizations, social workers and the children themselves may refer a child to such shelter
homes.
26

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(7) All shelter homes shall submit a report of children using the shelter home facility along with
a photograph of the child to the Committee, the missing persons bureau or special juvenile police
unit and the District Child Protection Unit or the State Child Protection Unit.
(8) The requirements of producing a child received by a shelter home before the Committee,
inquiry and disposal under sections 32, 33, 38 and 39 of the Act shall apply only to shelter homes
other than drop-in-centres as specified in rule 30(2)(c) of these rules.
(9) The services of Officer-in-charge, child welfare officer, social worker shall be provided for
the proper care, protection, development, rehabilitation and reintegration needs of children in
shelter homes.
(10) No child shall ordinarily stay in a short stay home for more than a year except in special
circumstances with the approval of the Committee.
31. Guidelines for prevention of sexual abuse of children.― The Central Government,
State Government, the Juvenile Justice Board, the Child Welfare Committee, other competent
authorities and agencies shall, in the best interest of children, ensure that every person, school or
such other educational institutions abide by the guidelines issued from time to time by Central
Government and State Government.
CHAPTER V
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL REINTEGRATION
32. Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration.― The primary aim of rehabilitation and
social reintegration is to help children in restoring their dignity and self-worth and mainstream
them through rehabilitation within the family where possible, or otherwise through alternate care
programmes and long-term institutional care shall be of last resort.
33. Adoption.― (1) The primary aim of adoption is to provide a child who cannot be cared
for by his biological parents with a permanent substitute family.
(1) For all matters relating to adoption, the guidelines issued by the Central Adoption Resource
Agency and notified by the Central Government under sub-section (3) of section 41of the Act,
shall apply.
(3) In case of orphaned and abandoned children the following procedure shall apply, namely:-
(a) Specialized Adoption Agencies shall produce all orphaned and abandoned
children who are to be declared legally free for adoption before the Committee within
twenty-four hours of receiving such children, excluding the time taken for journey;
(b) a child becomes eligible for adoption when the Committee has completed its
inquiry and declares the child legally free for adoption;
(c) such declaration shall be made in Form XIV;
27

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(d) a child must be produced before the Committee at the time of declaring such child
legally free for adoption;
(e) whenever intimation is received by the police about an abandoned infant, the
police shall take charge of the infant and arrange to provide immediate medical assistance
and care;
(f) subsequently, the child shall be placed in a specialized adoption agency or
recognized and certified children’s home or in a pediatric unit of a Government hospital
followed by production of the child before the Committee within twenty-four hours;
(g) procedure for declaring a child abandoned and certifying him legally free for
adoption:
( i ) in case of an abandoned child, the recognized agency shall within twenty four
hours, report and produce the child before the Committee with the copy of the
report filed with the police station in whose jurisdiction the child was found
abandoned;
(ii) the Committee will institute a process of inquiry, which shall include a thorough
inquiry conducted by the Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer, as the case
may be and who shall give report in Form XIII to the Committee containing the
findings within one month;
(iii) there shall be a declaration by the specialized adoption agency, stating that there
has been no claimant for the child even after making notification in at least one
leading national newspaper and one regional language newspaper for children
below two years of age and for children above two years, an additional television
or radio announcement and notification to the missing persons squad or bureau
shall be made;
(iv) the steps stated in (iii) shall be taken within a period of sixty days from the time
when the child is found in case of a child below two years of age and in case of
children above two years of age, this period shall be four months;
(v) the period of notification shall run concurrently with the inquiry to be conducted
and report submitted under clause (ii) of this sub-rule;
(vi) the Committee shall declare the child legally free for adoption on completion of
the process of inquiry, including declaration of the specialized adoption agency
made under clauses (ii) and (iii) of this sub-rule;
(vii) no child above seven years who can understand and express his opinion shall be
declared free for adoption without his consent.
(4) In case of surrendered children the following procedure shall apply, namely:-
(a) a surrendered child is one who had been declared as such after due process of inquiry by the
Committee and in order to be declared legally free for adoption, a ‘surrendered’ child shall be
any of the following:
(i) born as a consequence of non-consensual relationship;
(ii) born of an unwed mother or out of wedlock;
(iii) a child in whose case one of the biological parents is dead and the living parent is
incapacitated to take care;
28

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(iv) a child where the parents or guardians are compelled to relinquish him due to physical,
emotional and social factors beyond their control;
(b) serious efforts shall be made by the Committee for counselling the parents, explaining the
consequences of adoption and exploring the possibilities of parents retaining the child and if,
the parents are unwilling to retain, then, such children shall be kept initially in foster care or
arranged for their sponsorship;
(c) if the surrender is inevitable, a deed of surrender in Form XV shall be executed on a non-
judicial stamp paper in the presence of the Committee;
(d) the adoption agencies shall wait for completion of two months reconsideration time given to
the biological parent or parents after surrender;
(e) in case of a child surrendered by his biological parent or parents, the document of surrender
shall be executed by the parent or parents before the Committee;
(f) after due inquiry, the Committee shall declare the surrendered child legally free for adoption
in Form XIII as the case may be after a sixty days’ reconsideration period as per Central
Adoption Resource Agency guidelines.
(5) For the purposes of section 41 of the Act, ‘court’ implies a civil court, which has jurisdiction
in matters of adoption and guardianship and may include the court of the district judge, family
courts and city civil court.
34. Foster Care.― (1) For children who cannot be placed in adoption, order shall be issued
by the competent authority in Form XVII for carrying out foster care, as given in sub-section (2)
of section 42 of the Act and rule 35 (1) of these rules, under the supervision of a probation
officer or case worker or social worker, as the case may be, and the period of foster care shall
depend on the need of the child.
(2) Every State Government shall design its own foster care programme so as to reduce
institutionalization of children and enable a nurturing family environment for every child.
(3) The State Government shall consult the Boards or Committees, non-governmental
organisations, academicians and organisations working on alternative care for children in
developing the foster care programme.
35. Criteria for selection of families for foster care.― (1) In case of the children covered
under rule 34 of these rules, the following criteria shall apply for selection of families for foster
care, namely:-
(i) foster parents should have stable emotional adjustment within the family;
(ii) foster parents should have an income in which they are able to meet the needs of the
child and are not dependent on the foster care maintenance payment;
(iii) the monthly family income shall be adequate to take care of foster children and
approved by the Committee;
(iv) medical reports of all the members of the family residing in the premises should be
obtained including checks on Human Immuno Deficiency Virus (HIV), Tuberculosis
(TB) and Hepatitis B to determine that they are medically fit;
29

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(v) the foster parents should have experience in child caring and the capacity to provide
good child care;
(vi) the foster parents should be physically, mentally and emotionally stable;
(vii) the home should have adequate space and basic facilities;
(viii) the foster care family should be willing to follow rules laid down including regular
visits to pediatrician, maintenance of child health and their records;
(ix) the family should be willing to sign an agreement and to return the child to the
specialized adoption agency whenever called to do so;
(x) the foster parents should be willing to attend training or orientation programmes; and
(xi) the foster parents should be willing to take the child for regular ( at least once a month
in the case of infants) checkups to a pediatrician approved by the agency.
(2) There shall be no discrimination in selection of foster-parents on the basis of caste, religion,
ethnic status, disability, or health status and the best interest of the child shall be paramount in
deciding foster-care placement.
(3) The foster parents shall be declared ‘fit persons’ by the Committee before placing the child as
per the provisions laid down in clause (i) of section 2 of the Act after thorough assessment done
by the Child Welfare Officer or Social Worker as per Form XVI.
36. Pre-adoption Foster Care.― In case of pre-adoption foster care, the provisions
contained in sub-section (1) of section 42 and the corresponding guidelines notified under sub-
section (3) of section 41 of the Act, shall apply.
37. Sponsorship.― (1) The State Government shall prepare sponsorship programme in
consultation with the Non Governmental Organisations, Child Welfare Committees, other
relevant government agencies and the corporate sector.
(2) The State Government, with the help of District or State Child Protection Units shall identify
families and children at risk and provide necessary support services in the form of sponsorship
for child’s education, health, nutrition and other developmental needs.
(3) The children's homes and special homes shall promote sponsorship programmes as laid down
in section 43 of the Act.
(4) The institutions receiving sponsorship, shall maintain proper and separate accounts of all
the receipts and payments for the programme.
(5) The Board or the Committee shall make an order in Form XVIII for support to a juvenile
or child through sponsorship and send a copy to the District or State Child Protection Unit or the
State Government for appropriate action
38. After Care Organisation.― (1) The State Government shall set up an after care
programme for care of juveniles or children after they leave special homes and children's homes
with the objective to facilitate their transition from an institution-based life to mainstream society
for social re-integration.
30

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(2) After care programmes shall be made available for 18-21 year old persons, who have no
place to go to or are unable to support themselves, by the District or State Child Protection Units
in collaboration with voluntary organizations for the purpose of section 44 of the Act and this
rule.
(3) Once the Board or the Committee passes an order in Form XIX for placing a juvenile or
a child completing 18 years of age under the after care programme, a copy of such order shall be
sent to the District and the State Child Protection Unit and the State Government, who shall be
responsible for arranging after care.
(4) The Board or the Committee shall have jurisdiction over persons placed in after care
programme.
(5) The objective of these organisations shall be to enable such children to adapt to the
society and during their stay in these transitional homes these children will be encouraged to
move away from an institution-based life to a normal one.
(6) The key components of the programme shall include:-
(a) community group housing on a temporary basis for groups of young persons aged
18-21 years;
(b) encouragement to learn a vocation or gain employment and contribute towards the
rent as well as the running of the home;
(c) encouragement to gradually sustain themselves without state support and move
out of the group home to stay in a place of their own after saving sufficient
amount through their earnings;
(d) provision for a peer counsellor to stay in regular contact with these groups to
discuss their rehabilitation plans and provide creative outlets for their energy and
to tide over crisis periods in their life.
(7) During the course of vocational training a stipend may be provided till such time that the
youth gets employment.
(8) Loans may be arranged for the youth in an after care programme aspiring to set up
entrepreneurial activities on the basis of an application made by them and due verification of
the need for such a loan, and necessary professional advice and training shall be made
available to the youth in the after care programme in this regard.
(9) The structure shall include 6 to 8 youths in each group home who may opt to stay
together on their own and one peer counsellor for a cluster of five group homes.
39. Linkages and co-ordination.― (1) The State Government shall circulate a copy of the
Act and the rules framed thereunder to establish effective linkages between various government,
non-government, corporate and other community agencies for facilitating the rehabilitation and
31

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
social reintegration of juveniles or children through the Board or the Committee as the case may
be.
(2) The State Government with the help of State or District Child Protection Unit shall identify
the roles and responsibilities of each department at State or district levels for effective
implementation of the Act and the rules and inform them through a notification.
(3) The State Government with the help of State or District Child Protection Unit shall arrange
for appropriate training and sensitization of functionaries of these departments from time to time
in coordination with National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development and its
Regional Centres.
(4) The State Government with the help of State or District Child Protection Unit shall develop
effective networking and linkages with local non-governmental organisations for specialized
services and technical assistance like vocational training, education, health care, nutrition, mental
health intervention, drug de-addition and legal aid services.
CHAPTER VI
STANDARDS OF CARE FOR INSTITUTIONS
40. Physical infrastructure.― (1) The homes for juveniles in conflict with law and children
in need of care and protection shall function from separate premises.
(2) The accommodation in each institution shall be as per the following criteria, namely:-
(a) Observation Home:
(i) Separate observation homes for girls and boys;
(ii) Classification and segregation of juveniles according to their age group preferably 7-11
years, 12-16 years and 16-18 years, giving due consideration to physical and mental status
and the nature of the offence committed.
(b) Special Home:
(i) Separate special homes for girls above the age of 10 years and boys in the age groups of
11 to 15 and 16 to 18 years;
(ii) Classification and segregation of juveniles on the basis of age and nature of offences and
their mental and physical status
(c) Children’s Home:
(i) While children of both sexes below 10 years can be kept in the same home, separate
bathing and sleeping facilities shall be maintained for boys and girls in the age group of 5-10
years;
32

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(ii) Separate children’s homes for boys and girls in the age group of 7-11 and 12- 18 years;
(iii)Separate facilities for children in the age group of 0-5 years with appropriate facilities for
infants.
(d) Shelter Home:
(i) Separate shelter homes for girls and boys;
(ii) Separate shelter homes for girls above the age of 10 years and boys in the age groups of
11 to 15 and 16 to 18 years.
(3) The norms for building or accommodation for an institution with 50 juveniles or children
shall be as under:
(i) 2 Dormitories Each 1000 Sq. ft. for 25 juveniles/children i.e. 2000 Sq. ft.
(ii) 2 Classrooms 300 Sq. ft. for 25 juveniles/children i.e. 600 Sq. ft.
(iii) Sickroom/First aid room 75 Sq. ft. per juvenile/children for 10 i.e. 750 Sq. ft.
(iv) Kitchen 250 Sq. ft.
(v) Dining Hall 800 Sq. ft.
(vi) Store 250 Sq. ft.
(vii) Recreation room 300 Sq. ft.
(viii) Library 500 Sq. ft.
(ix) 5 bathrooms 25 Sq. ft. each i.e. 125 Sq. ft.
(x) 8 toilets/latrines 25 Sq. ft. each i.e. 200 Sq. ft.
(xi) Office rooms (a) 300 Sq. ft. (b) Superintendent’s room 200 sq. fit
(xii) Counselling and guidance room 120 Sq. ft.
(xiii) Workshop 1125 Sq. ft. for 15 juvenile @75 Sq. ft. per trainee
(xiv) Residence for Superintendent (a) 2 rooms of 250 Sq. ft. each (b) kitchen 75 Sq. ft. (c) bathroom cum
Toilet/latrine 50 Sq. ft
(xv) 2 Rooms for Juvenile Justice Board/Child Welfare Committee 300 Sq. ft. each i.e. 600 Sq. ft.
(xvi) Play ground Sufficient area according to the total number of juveniles or children
Total 8495 Sq. ft.
(4) The Superintendent shall stay within the institution and be provided with quarters and in case he
is not able to stay in the home for legitimate reasons (to be permitted by Director, Child Protection), any
other senior staff member of the institution shall stay in the institution and be in a position to supervise
the overall care of the children or juveniles and, take decisions in the case of any crisis and emergency.
(5) (i) the standards of accommodation as per the norms laid down in rule 40(2) shall be
observed to the extent possible and shall include a minimum of following facilities
:
(a) Dormitory: 40 Sq. ft. per juvenile or child
(b) Classroom: 300 Sq. ft for 25 juvenile or child
(c) Workshop: 75 Sq. ft. per juvenile or child
(d) Play ground: Sufficient play ground area shall be provided in every institution
according to the total number of juveniles in institution
(ii) there shall be proper and smooth flooring for preventing accidents.
(iii) there shall be adequate lighting, ventilation, heating and cooling arrangements, safe
drinking water and clean toilets, in terms of gender, age appropriateness and accessibility.
33

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(iv) all institutions under the Act shall make provision of first aid kit, fire extinguishers in
kitchen, dormitories, store rooms, counselling room, periodic review of electrical
installations, proper storage and inspection of articles of food stuffs, stand-by
arrangements for water storage and emergency lighting.
(6) The Observation homes and special homes shall be child-friendly and in no way shall they
look like a jail or lock-up.
41. Clothing and Bedding.― The clothing and bedding shall be as per the scale and climatic
conditions. The requirements of each juvenile or child and the minimum standards for clothing
and bedding are laid down in Schedule-I of these rules.
42. Sanitation and Hygiene.― Every institution shall have the following facilities, namely:-
(a) sufficient treated drinking water; water filters shall be installed;
(b) sufficient water for bathing and washing clothes, maintenance and cleanliness of
the premises;
(c) proper drainage system;
(d) arrangements for disposal of garbage;
(e) protection from mosquitoes by providing mosquito nets;
(f) annual pest control;
(g) sufficient number of well lit and airy toilets in the proportion of at least one
toilet for seven children;
(h) sufficient number of well lit and airy bathrooms in the proportion of at least one
bath room for ten children;
(i) sufficient space for washing;
(j) clean and fly-proof kitchen and separate area for washing utensils;
(k) sunning of bedding and clothing;
(l) maintenance of cleanliness in the Medical Centre.
43. Daily Routine.― (1) Every institution shall have a daily routine for the juveniles or
children developed in consultation with the Children’s Committees, which shall be prominently
displayed at various places within the institution.
(2) The daily routine shall provide, inter alia, for a regulated and disciplined life, personal
hygiene and cleanliness, physical exercise, yoga, educational classes, vocational training,
organized recreation and games, moral education, group activities, prayer and community
singing and special programmes for sundays and holidays.
44. Nutrition and Diet Scale.― The following nutrition and diet scale shall be followed by
the institutions, namely:-
(a) the children shall be provided four meals in a day including breakfast;
34

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(b) the menu shall be prepared with the help of a nutritional expert or doctor to ensure
balanced diet and variety in taste as per the minimum nutritional standard and diet
scale set out in Schedule II of these rules;
( c) every institution under this Act shall strictly adhere to the minimum nutritional
standard and diet scale specified in Schedule II;
(d) juveniles or children may be provided special meals on holidays and festivals;
(e) infants and sick juveniles or children shall be provided special diet according to
the advise of the doctor on their dietary requirement.
45. Medical Care.― Every institution shall:
(a) maintain a medical record of each juvenile or child on the basis of
monthly medical check-up and provide necessary medical facilities;
(b) ensure that the medical record includes weight and height record, any
sickness and treatment, and other physica1or mental problem;
(c) have arrangement for the medical facilities, including a doctor on call
available on all working days for regular medical check-ups and treatment of
juveniles or children;
(d) have sufficient medical equipments to handle minor health problems
including first aid kit with stock of emergency medicines and consumables;
(e) train all staff in handling first aid;
(f) tie-up with local Primary Health Centre, government hospital, medical
colleges, other hospitals, clinical psychologists and psychiatrists and mental
health institutes for regular visits by their doctors and students and for holding
periodic health camps within the institutions;
(g) make necessary arrangements made for the immunization coverage;
(h) take preventive measures in the event of out break of contagious or
infectious diseases;
(i) set up a system for referral of cases with deteriorating health or serious
cases to the nearest civil hospital or recognised treatment centres;
(j) keep sick children under constant medical supervision;
(k) admit a juvenile or child without insisting on a medical certificate at the
time of admission;
(l) arrange for a medical examination of each juvenile or child admitted in an
institution by the Medical Officer within twenty four hours and in special cases or
medical emergencies immediately;
(m) arrange for a medical examination of the juvenile or child by the Medical
Officer at the time of transfer within twenty four hours before transfer;
(n) not carry out any surgical treatment on any juvenile or child without the
previous consent of his parent or guardian, unless either the parent or guardian
cannot be found and the condition of the juvenile or child is such that any delay
shall, in the opinion of the medical officer, involve unnecessary suffering or
injury to the health of the juvenile or child, or otherwise without obtaining a
written consent to this effect from the Officer-in-charge of the institution;
(o) provide or arrange for regular counselling of every juvenile or child and
ensure specific mental health interventions for those in need of such services,
35

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
including separate rooms for counselling sessions within the premises of the
institution;
(p)refer such children who require specialized drug abuse prevention and
rehabilitation programme, to an appropriate centre administered by qualified
personnel where these programmes shall be adopted to the age, gender and other
specifications of the concerned child.
46. Mental Health.― (1) A mental health record of every juvenile or child shall be
maintained by the concerned institutions.
(2) Both mileu based interventions that is creating an enabling environment for children and
individual therapy are must for every child and shall be provided in all institutions.
Explanation.― For the purpose of this sub-rule, mileu based intervention is a process of
recovery, which starts through providing an enabling culture and environment in an
institution so as to ensure that each child’s abilities are discovered and they have choices and
right to take to decisions regarding their life and thus, they develop and identify beyond their
negative experiences and such intervention has a critical emotional impact on the child.
(3) The environment in an institution shall be free from abuse, allowing juveniles or children to
cope with their situation and regain confidence.
(4) All persons involved in taking care of the juveniles or children in an institution shall
participate in facilitating an enabling environment and work in collaboration with the therapists.
(5) Individual therapy is a specialized process and each institution shall make provisions for it as
a critical mental health intervention.
(6) Every institution shall have the services of trained counselors or collaboration with external
agencies such as child guidance centres, psychology and psychiatric departments or similar
government and non-governmental agencies, for specialized and regular individual therapy for
every juvenile or child in the institution.
(7) A mental health care plan shall be developed for every juvenile or child by the child welfare
officers in consultation with mental health experts associated with the institution and integrated
into the individual care plan of the concerned juvenile or child.
(8) The recommendations of mental health experts shall be maintained in every case file and
integrated into the care plan for every child.
(9) All care plans shall be produced before the Management Committee set up under rule 55 of
these rules every month and before the Child Welfare Committee every quarter.
(10) No juvenile or child shall be administered medication for mental health problems without a
psychological evaluation and diagnosis by appropriately trained mental health professionals.
36

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
47. Education.― (1) Every institution shall provide education to all juveniles or children
according to the age and ability, both inside the institution or outside, as per the requirement.
(2) There shall be a range of educational opportunities including, mainstream inclusive
schools, bridge school, open schooling, non formal education and learning and input from special
educators where needed.
(3) Wherever necessary, extra coaching shall be made available to school going children in
the institutions by encouraging volunteer services or tying up with coaching centers.
48. Vocational Training.― (a) Every institution shall provide gainful vocational training to
juveniles or children.
(b) The institutions shall develop networking with Institute of Technical Instruction, Jan
Shikshan Sansthan, Government and Private Organization or Enterprises, Agencies or non-
governmental organisations with expertise or placement agencies.
49. Recreation facilities.― (1) A provision of guided recreation shall be made available to
all juveniles or children in the institutions.
(2) It shall include indoor and outdoor games, music, television, picnics and outings, cultural
programmes and library.
50. Institutional Management of juveniles or children.― (1) The following procedure
shall be followed in respect of the newly admitted juveniles:
(a) receiving and search;
(b) disinfection and storing of juvenile's personal belongings and other valuables;
(c) bath and haircut (unless prohibited by religion);
(d) issue of toiletry items; new set of clothes, bedding and other outfit and equipment
(as per scales);
(e) medical examination and treatment where necessary and in case of every juvenile
suspected to be suffering from contagious or infectious diseases, mental ailments
or addiction;
(f) segregation in specially earmarked dormitories or wards or hospitals in case of a
child suffering from contagious disease requiring special care and caution;
(g) attending to immediate and urgent needs of the juveniles like appearing in
examinations, interview letter to parents, personal problems and verification by
the Officer-in-charge of age of juvenile as per order of the Board.
(2) Every newly admitted juvenile or child shall be allotted a case worker from amongst
the probation officers or child welfare officers or social workers or counsellors attached
to the institutions or voluntary social workers or counsellors.
(3) Every newly admitted juvenile shall be familiarized with the institution and its
functioning and shall receive orientation in the following areas:
37

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(a) personal health, hygiene and sanitation;
(b) institutional discipline and standards of behaviour, respect for elders and teachers;
(c) daily routine, peer interaction, optimum use of developmental opportunities; and
(d) rights, responsibilities and obligations within the institution.
(4) The designated officer shall enter the name of the juvenile or child in the Admission
Register and allocate appropriate accommodation facility.
(5) The photograph shall also be taken immediately for records and the case worker or
probation officer or welfare officer shall begin the investigation and correspondence
with the person, the juvenile or child might have named.
(6) The Officer-in-charge shall see that the personal belongings of the juvenile or child
received by the institution is kept in safe custody and recorded in the Personal
Belonging Register and the item must be returned to the juvenile or child when he
leaves the institution.
(7) The girl juvenile or child shall be searched by a female member of the staff, and with
due regard to decency and dignity of the juvenile or child.
(8) The educational level and vocational aptitude of the juvenile admitted, may be assessed
on the basis of test and interview conducted by the teacher, the workshop supervisor
and other technical staff and necessary linkages may also be established with outside
specialists and community-based welfare agencies, psychologist, psychiatrist, child
guidance clinic, hospital and local doctors, open school or Jan Sikshan Sansthan.
(9) A case history of the juvenile or the child admitted to an institution shall be maintained as
per Form XX, which shall contain information regarding his socio-cultural and economic
background and these informations may invariably be collected through all possible and
available sources, including home, parents or guardians, employer, school, friends and
community.
(10) A well conceived programme of pre-release planning and follow up of cases discharged
from special homes shall be organized in all institutions in close collaboration with existing
governmental and voluntary welfare organizations.
(11) In the event of a juvenile or child leaving the institution without permission or
committing an offence within the institution, the information shall be sent by the officer-in-
charge of the concerned institution to the police and the family, if known; and the detailed
report of circumstances along with the efforts to trace the juvenile or child where the juvenile
or child is missing, shall be sent to the Board or Committee, as the case may be.
(12) An individual care plan for every juvenile or child in institutional care shall be
developed with the ultimate aim of the child being rehabilitated and re-integrated based on
38

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
their case history, circumstances and individual needs and the individual care plan shall be
based on following guidelines:
(a) the Officer-in-charge, counsellor along with the child welfare officer or case
worker, or social worker shall prepare an individual care plan for every child in an
institution within one month of his admittance as per Form XXI;
(b) all care plans shall include a plan for the juvenile’s or child’s restoration,
rehabilitation, reintegration and follow-up;
(c) the care plan shall be reviewed quarterly by the Management Committee set up
under rule 55 of these rules for appropriate development and rehabilitation
including options for release or restoration to family or foster care or adoption;
(d) juveniles or children shall be consulted while determining their care plan;
(e) continuity of care plan shall be ensured in cases of transfer or repatriation or
restoration.
51. Prohibited Articles.― No person shall bring into the institution the following
prohibited articles, namely:
(a) fire-arms or other weapons, whether requiring license or not (like knife, blades, lathi,
spears and swords);
(b) alcohol and spirit of any description;
(c) bhang, ganja, opium or other narcotic or psychotropic substances;
(d) tobacco; or
(e) any other article specified in this behalf by the State Government by a general or special
order.
52. Articles found on search and inspection.― (1) The Officer-in-Charge shall see that
every juvenile received in the institution is searched, his personal belongings inspected and
money or any valuables found with the juvenile is kept in the safe custody of the Officer-in-
Charge.
(2) The girls shall be searched by a female member of the staff and both the girls and boys shall
be searched with due regard to decency and dignity.
(3) In every institution, a record of money, valuables and other articles found with a juvenile
shall be maintained in the "Personal Belongings Register”.
(4) The entries made in the Personal Belongings Register, relating to each juvenile, shall be read
over to juvenile in the presence of a witness, whose signature shall be obtained in token of the
correctness of such entries and it shall be countersigned by the Officer-in-Charge.
53. Disposal of articles.― The money or valuables belonging to a juvenile received or
retained in an institution shall be disposed of in the following manner, namely:
(a) on an order made by the competent authority in respect of any juvenile, directing the
juvenile to be sent to an institution, the Officer-in-Charge shall deposit such juvenile's money
39

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
together with the sale proceeds in the manner laid down from time to time in the name of the
juvenile;
(b) the juvenile's money shall be kept with the Officer-in-Charge and valuables, clothing,
bedding and other articles, if any, shall be kept in safe custody;
(c) when such juvenile is transferred from one institution to another, all his money, valuables
and other articles, shall be sent along with the juvenile to the Officer-in-Charge of the
institution to which he has been transferred together with a full and correct statement of the
description and estimated value thereof;
(d) at the time of release of such juvenile, the valuables and other articles kept in safe
custody and the money deposited in name of the juvenile shall be handed over to the parent
or guardian, as the case may be, with an entry made in this behalf in the register and signed
by the Officer-in-Charge;
(e) when a juvenile in an institution dies, the valuable and other articles left by the deceased
and the money deposited in the name of the juvenile shall be handed over by the Officer-in-
Charge to any person who establishes his claim thereto and executes an indemnity bond;
(f) a receipt shall be obtained from such person for having received such valuables and other
articles and the amount;
(g) if no claimant appears within a period of six months from the date of death or escape of
such juvenile, the valuables and other articles and amount shall be disposed of as per the
decision taken by Management Committee set up under rule 55 of these rules.
54. Maintenance of case file.― (1) The case file of each juvenile and child shall be
maintained in the institution containing the following information:
(a) report of the person or agency who produced the juvenile before the Board;
(b) officer-in-charge’s, probation officer's or child welfare officer’s, counselor’s and case-
workers reports;
(c) information from previous institution;
(d) report of the initial interaction with the juvenile, information from family members,
relatives, community, friends and miscellaneous information;
(e) source of further information;
(f) observation reports from staff members;
(g) regular health status reports from Medical Officer, drug de-addiction progress reports,
progress reports vis-a-vis psychological counselling or any other mental health
intervention, where applicable;
(h) Intelligence Quotient (I.Q) testing, aptitude testing, educational or vocational tests;
(i) social history;
(j) summary and analysis by case-worker and Officer-in-charge;
(k) instruction regarding training and treatment programme and about special precautions to
be taken;
40

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(l) leave and other privileges granted;
(m) special achievements and violation of rules, if any, ;
(n) quarterly progress report;
(o) individual care plan, including pre-release programme, post release plan and follow-up
plan as prescribed in Form XXI;
(p) leave of absence or release under supervision;
(q) final discharge;
(r) follow-up reports;
(s) annual photograph;
(t) case history duly filled in prescribed Form XX;
(u) follow-up report of post release cases as per direction of the competent authority if any;
and
(v) remarks.
(2) All the case files maintained by the institutions and the Board or Committee shall, as far as
possible, be computerised and networked so that the data is centrally available to the State and
the District Child Protection Unit and the State Government.
55. Management Committee.― (1) Every institution shall have a Management Committee
for the management of the institution and monitoring the progress of every juvenile and child.
(2) In order to ensure proper care and treatment as per the individual care plans, a juvenile or
child shall be grouped on the basis of age, nature of offence or kind of care required, physical
and mental health and length of stay order.
(3) The Management Committee shall consist of the following personnel:
District Child Protection Officer (District Child Protection Unit)- Chairperson
Officer-in-charge - Member-Secretary
Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker - Member
Medical Officer - Member
Psychologist or Counsellor - Member
Workshop Supervisor or Instructor in Vocation - Member
Teacher - Member
Social Worker Member of Juvenile Justice Board or
Child Welfare Committee - Member
A juvenile or child representative from each of the Children’s
Committees (on a monthly rotation basis to ensure
representation of juveniles or children from all age groups) - Member
(4) In the districts where District Child Protection Unit is not constituted the District Magistrate
or Collector or his nominee shall be the Chairperson of this Committee.
(5) Where voluntary organizations are involved in providing professional and technical services
like education, vocational training, psychosocial care, mental health intervention and legal aid,
41

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
the Management Committee may invite a representative of such voluntary organizations as a
special invitee to the Management Committee meetings.
(6) (a) The Management Committee shall meet every month to consider and review―
(i) custodial care or care in the institution, housing, area of activity and type of
supervision or interventions required;
(ii) medical facilities and treatment;
(iii) food, water, sanitation and hygiene conditions;
(iv) mental health interventions with the juveniles and children;
(v) individual problems of juveniles and children, provision of legal aid services and
institutional adjustment, leading to the quarterly review of individual care plans;
(vi) vocational training and opportunities for employment;
(vii) education and life skills development programmes;
(viii) social adjustment, recreation, group work activities, guidance and counseling;
(ix) review of progress, adjustment and modification of residential programmes to the
needs of the juveniles and children;
(x) planning post-release or post-restoration rehabilitation programme and follow up
for a period of two years in collaboration with aftercare services;
(xi) pre-release or pre-restoration preparation;
(xii) release or restoration;
(xiii) post release or post-restoration follow-up;
(xiv) minimum standards of care, including infrastructure and services available;
(xv) daily routine;
(xvi) community participation and voluntarism in the residential life of children such as
education, vocational activities, recreation and hobby;
(xvii) oversee that all registers as required under the Act and rules are maintained by
the institution, check and verify these registers, duly stamped and signed in the
monthly review meetings;
(xviii) matters concerning the Children’s Committees;
(xix) any other matter which the Officer-in-Charge may like to bring up.
(b) The officer-in-charge or child welfare officer shall file a quarterly progress report of
every juvenile or child in the case file and send a copy to the District Child Protection
Unit and Board or Committee, as the case may be.
(7) The Management Committee shall set up a complaint and redress mechanism in every
institution and a Children’s Suggestion Box shall be installed in every institution at a place easily
accessible to juveniles and children away from the office set up and closer to the residence or
rooms or dormitories of the children.
(8) (a) The Children’s Suggestion Box, whose key shall remain in the custody of the Chairperson
of the Management Committee, shall be checked every week by the Chairperson of the
Management Committee or his representative from District Child Protection Unit, in the
presence of the members of the Children’s Committees.
42

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(b) If there is a problem or suggestion that requires immediate attention, the Chairperson of
the Management Committee shall call for an emergency meeting of the Management
Committee to discuss and take necessary action.
(c) The quorum for conducting the emergency meetings shall be five members, including
two members of Children’s Committees, Chairperson of the Management Committee,
Member of Committee or the Board as the case may be and the Officer-in-Charge of the
institution.
(d) In the event of a serious allegation or complaint against the Officer-in-Charge of the
institution, he shall not be part of the emergency meeting and another available member of
the Management Committee shall be included in his place.
(e) All suggestions received through the suggestion box and action taken as a result of the
decisions made in the emergency meeting or action required to be taken shall be placed for
discussion and review in the monthly meeting of the Management Committee.
(9) A Children’s Suggestion Book shall be maintained in every institution where the
complaints and action taken by the Management Committee are duly recorded and such action
and follow up shall be communicated to the Children’s Committees after every monthly meeting
of the Management Committee.
(10) The Board or Committee shall review the Children’s Suggestion Book at least once in
three months.
56. Children’s Committees.― (1) Officer-in-Charge of every institution for juveniles or
children shall facilitate the setting up of Children’s Committees for three different age groups of
children, viz., 6-10 years, 11-15 years and 16-18 years and these Children’s Committees shall be
constituted solely by children.
(2) Such Children’s Committee shall be encouraged to participate in following activities:
(a) improvement of the condition of the institution;
(b) reviewing the standards of care being followed;
(c) preparing daily routine and diet scale;
(d) developing educational, vocational and recreation plans;
(e) supporting each other in managing crisis;
(f) reporting abuse and exploitation by peers and caregivers;
(g) creative expression of their views through wall papers or newsletters or paintings or
music or theater;
(h) management of institution through the Management Committee.
(3) The Officer-in-Charge shall ensure that the Children’s Committees meet every month and
maintain a register for recording its activities and proceedings, and place it before the
Management Committee in their monthly meetings.
43

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(4) The Officer-in-Charge shall ensure that the Children’s Committees are provided with
essential support and materials including stationary, space and guidance for effective
functioning.
(5) The Officer-in-Charge shall, as far as possible, seek assistance from local voluntary
organization or child participation experts for the setting up and functioning of the Children’s
Committees.
(6) The local voluntary organization or child participation expert shall support the Children’s
Committees in the following:
(j) selecting their leaders;
(k) conducting the monthly meetings;
(l) developing rules for the functioning of Children’s Committees and following it;
(m) maintaining records and Children’s Suggestion Book and other relevant documents;
(n) any other innovative activity.
(7) The Management Committee shall seek a report from the Officer-in-Charge on the setting up
and functioning of the Children’s Committees, review these reports in their monthly
meetings and take necessary action where required.
57. Rewards and Earnings.― The rewards to a juvenile or child, at such rates as may be
fixed by the management of the institution from time to time, may be granted by the Officer-in-
Charge as an encouragement to steady work and good behaviour; and at the time of release, the
reward shall be handed over after obtaining a receipt from the parent or the guardian who comes
to take charge of the juvenile or child or juvenile or child himself.
58. Visits to and communication with juveniles or children.― (1) The parents and
relatives of the juveniles or children shall be allowed to visit once in a month or in special cases,
more frequently at the discretion of the Officer-in-Charge as per the visiting hours laid down by
him, except where parents or relatives or guardian have been found to be responsible for
subjecting the juvenile or child to violence, abuse and exploitation.
(2) The receipt of letters by the juveniles or children of the institution shall not be restricted and
they shall have freedom to write as many letters as they like at all reasonable times; and the
institution shall ensure that where parents, guardians or relatives are known, at least one letter is
written by the juvenile or children every month for which the postage shall be provided by the
institution.
(3) The Officer-in-Charge may peruse any letter written by or to the juvenile or children, and
may for the reasons that he considers sufficient refuse to deliver or issue the letter and forward it
to the Committee after recording his reasons in a book maintained for the purpose.
(4) The Officer-in-Charge shall, in special circumstances or as per orders of the Board or
Committee, allow a juvenile or child to make telephonic communication with his parents or
guardians or relatives.
44

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
59. Death of a juvenile or child.― On the occurrence of any case of death or suicide in an
institution the procedure to be adopted shall be as under: -
(1) In the event of an unnatural death or suicide of a juvenile or child in an institution it is
imperative for the institution to ensure that an inquest and post-mortem examination is held at
the earliest.
(2) In case of natural death or due to illness of a juvenile or child, the Officer-in-charge shall
obtain a report of the Medical Officer stating the cause of death and a written intimation about
the death shall be given immediately to the nearest Police Station, the Board or Committee, the
National or State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, District Child Protection Unit or
State Child Protection Unit or any other concerned authority and the parents or guardians or
relatives of the juvenile or child.
(3) Whenever a sudden or violent death or death from suicide or accident takes place,
immediate information shall be given by the case-worker or probation officer or welfare officer
to the Officer-in-Charge and the Medical Officer and the Officer-in-Charge shall immediately
inform the nearest police station, Board or Committee and parents or guardians or relatives of the
deceased juvenile or child.
(4) If a juvenile or child dies within twenty four hours of his admission to the institution, the
Officer-in-charge of the institution shall report the matter to the officer-in-charge of the Police
Station having jurisdiction and the District Medical Officer or the nearest Government Hospital
and the parents or guardians or relatives of such juvenile or child without delay.
(5) The Officer-in-charge shall also immediately give intimation to nearest Magistrate
empowered to hold inquests and to the Board or as the case may be the Committee.
(6) The Officer-in-Charge and the Medical Officer at the institution shall record the
circumstances of the death of the child and send a report to the concerned Magistrate, the
Officer-in-charge of the police station having jurisdiction, the Committee and the District
Medical Officer or the nearest government hospital where the dead body of the juvenile or child
is sent for examination, inspection and determination of the cause of death and the Officer-in-
charge and the Medical Officer shall also record in writing their views on the cause of the death
if any, and submit it to the concerned Magistrate and the Officer-in-charge of the police station
having jurisdiction.
(7) The officer-in-charge and the Medical Officer shall make themselves available for any
inquiries initiated by the police or the Magistrate concerning the cause of death and other details
regarding such juvenile or child.
(8) As soon as the inquest is held, the body shall be handed over to the parents or guardian or
relatives or, in the absence of any claimant, the last rituals shall be performed under the
supervision of the officer-in-charge in accordance with the known religion of the juvenile or
child.
45

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
60. Abuse and exploitation of the juvenile or child.― (1) Every institution shall have
systems of ensuring that there is no abuse, neglect and maltreatment and this shall include the
staff being aware of what constitutes abuse, neglect and maltreatment as well as early indicators
of abuse, neglect and maltreatment and how to respond to these.
(2) In the event of any physical, sexual or emotional abuse, including neglect of juveniles
and children in an institution by those responsible for care and protection, the following action
shall be taken:
(i) the incidence of abuse and exploitation must be reported by any staff member of
the institution immediately to the Officer-in-Charge on receiving such information;
(ii) when an allegation of physical, sexual or emotional abuse comes to the
knowledge of the Officer-in-Charge, a report shall be placed before the Board or Committee,
who in turn, shall order for special investigation;
(iii) the Board or Committee shall direct the local police station or Special Juvenile
Police Unit to register a case, take due cognizance of such occurrences and conduct necessary
investigations;
(iv) the Board or Committee shall take necessary steps to ensure completion of all
inquiry and provide legal aid as well as counselling to the juvenile or child victim;
(v) the Board or Committee shall transfer such a juvenile or child to another
institution or place of safety or fit person;
(vi) the Officer-in-charge of the institution shall also inform the chairperson of the
management committee and place a copy of the report of the incident and subsequent action
taken before the management committee in its next meeting;
(vii) in the event of any other crime committed in respect of juveniles or children in
institutions, the Board or Committee shall take cognizance and arrange for necessary
investigation to be carried out by the local police station or Special Juvenile Police Unit;
(viii) the Board or Committee may consult Children’s Committee setup in each
institution to enquire into the fact of abuse and exploitation as well as seek assistance from
relevant voluntary organizations, child rights experts, mental health experts or crisis intervention
centres in dealing with matters of abuse and exploitation of juveniles or children in an institution.
61. Juvenile or Child suffering from dangerous diseases or mental health problems.―
(1) When a juvenile or a child placed under the care of a fit person or a fit institution under the
provisions of the Act, is found to be suffering from a disease or physical or mental health
problems requiring prolonged medical treatment, or is found addicted to a narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance, the juvenile or the child may be sent by an order of the competent
authority to an appropriate place for such period as may be certified by medical officer to be
46

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
necessary for proper treatment of the juvenile or the child or for the remainder of the term for
which he has to stay.
(2) When the juvenile or the child is cured of the disease or physical or mental health problems,
the competent authority may, if the juvenile or child is still liable to stay, order the juvenile or the
child to be placed back in the care of fit person or institution from where the juvenile or child
was removed for treatment and if the juvenile or the child is no longer liable to be kept under the
care of fit person or institution, the competent authority may order him to be discharged.
(3) The order of restoration of a juvenile or a child suffering from an infectious or contagious
disease to his parents or guardian shall be based on the principle of best interest of the juvenile or
child, keeping in mind the risk of stigmatization and discrimination and discontinuation of
treatment.
(4) Where there is no organization either within the jurisdiction of the competent authority, or
nearby District or State for care and protection of juveniles or children suffering from serious
psychiatric or physical disorder and infection, as required under section 58 of the Act, necessary
organization shall be set up by the State Government at such places, as it may deem fit to cater to
the special needs of such juveniles or children.
62. Leave of absence of a juvenile or child.― (1) A juvenile or child in an institution may
be allowed to go on leave of absence or released under supervision for examination or admission,
special occasions like marriage or emergencies like death or accident or serious illness in the
family.
(2) While the leave of absence for short period generally not exceeding seven days excluding the
journey time may be recommended by the Officer-in-charge, but granting of such leave shall be
by the Board or Committee.
(3) The parents or guardian of the juvenile or the Officer-in-charge on behalf of the juvenile or
child may submit an application to the Board or Committee requesting for relieving the juvenile
or child on leave, stating clearly the purpose for the leave and the period of leave.
(4) While considering the application of leave of absence, the Board or Committee shall hear the
juvenile or child or the parents or guardians of the juvenile or child and if the Board or
Committee considers that granting of such leave is in the interest of the juvenile or child,
appropriate order shall be made and the Board or Committee may call for a report from the
probation officer or child welfare officer in case the preliminary information gathered from the
juvenile or child or concerned parent or guardian is not sufficient for the purpose.
(5) While issuing orders sanctioning the leave of absence or relieving under supervision, as the
case may be, the competent authority shall mention the period of leave and the conditions
attached to the leave order, and if any of these conditions are not complied with during the leave
period, the juvenile or child may be called back to the institution.
47

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(6) The parent or guardian shall arrange to escort the juvenile or child from and to the institution
and where this is not possible, the Officer-in-charge may arrange to escort the juvenile or child to
the place of the family and back. In case the parents or guardian is willing to arrange escort but
does not have requisite financial means, the Officer-in-charge shall arrange for the traveling
expenses as admissible under the rules.
(7) If the juvenile or child runs away from the family during the leave period, the parent or
guardian is required to inform the Officer-in-charge of the institution immediately, and try to
trace the juvenile or child and if found, the juvenile or child shall be brought back to the
institution immediately.
(8) If the juvenile or child is not found within twenty four hours, the Officer-in-Charge shall
report the matter to the nearest police station and missing person’s bureau, but no adverse
disciplinary action shall be taken against the juvenile or child and procedure laid down under the
Act shall be followed.
(9) If the parent or guardian does not take proper care of the juvenile or child during the
leave period or does not bring the juvenile or child back to the institution within the stipulated
period, such leave may be refused on later occasions.
(10) If the juvenile or child does not return to the institution on expiry of the sanctioned leave,
the Board or Committee shall refer the case to police for taking charge of the juvenile and bring
him back to the institution.
(11) The period of such leave shall be counted as a part of the period of stay in the institution and
the time which elapses after the failure of a juvenile to return to the institution within the
stipulated period, shall be excluded while computing the period of his stay in the institution.
63. Inspection.― (1) The State Government shall constitute State, District or city level
inspection committee on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted under rule
91 of these rules.
(2) The inspection committees shall visit and oversee the conditions in the institutions and
appropriateness of the processes for safety, well being and permanence, review the standards of
care and protection being followed by the institutions, look out for any incidence of violation of
child rights, look into the functioning of the Management Committee and Children’s Committee
set up under rules 55 and 56 of these rules and give appropriate directions.
(3) The team shall also make suggestions for improvement and development of the institution.
(4) The team shall consist of a minimum of five members with representation from the State
Government, the Board or Committee, the State Commission for the Protection of Child Rights
or the State Human Rights Commission, medical and other experts, voluntary organizations and
reputed social workers.
(5) The inspection shall be carried out at least once in every three months.
48

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(6) The inspection visit shall be carried out by not less than three members.
(7) The team may visit the institutions either by prior intimation or make a surprise visit.
(8) The team shall interact with the children during the visits to the institution, to determine their
well-being and uninhibited feed back.
(9) The follow up action on the findings and suggestion of the children shall be taken by all
concerned authorities.
(10) The action taken report, findings and suggestions from the Inspection Committee shall be
sent to the District Child Protection Unit and the State Government.
64. Social Audit.― (1) The Central Government or the State Government shall monitor
and evaluate the implementation of the Act annually by reviewing matters concerning
establishment of Board or Committee or Special Juvenile Police Unit where required,
functioning of Board or Committee or Special Juvenile Police Unit, functioning of institutions
and staff, functioning of adoption agencies, child friendly administration of juvenile justice and
any other matter concerning effective implementation of the Act in the State.
(2) The social audit shall be carried out with support and involvement of organizations
working in the field of mental health, child care and protection and autonomous bodies like the
National Institute of Public Co-operation and Child Development, Indian Council for Child
Welfare, Childline India Foundation, Central and State level Social Welfare Boards, School of
Social Work and School of Law.
65. Restoration and Follow-up.― (1) The order for restoration of the juvenile or child shall
be made by the Board or Committee on the basis of a fair hearing of the juvenile or child and his
parents or guardian, as well as on the reports of the Probation Officers or Child Welfare Officers
or non-governmental organisations directed by the Board or Committee to conduct the home
study and any other relevant document or report brought before the Board or Committee for
deciding the matter.
(2) The Board or Committee shall send a copy of the restoration order along with a copy of the
order for escort as per Form XXII to the District Child Protection Unit or State Government
who shall provide funds for restoration of the juvenile or child.
(3) Every restoration shall be planned for as part of the individual care plans prepared by the
case-workers or counsellors or child welfare officers or probation officer, as the case may be,
and shall be based on the review and recommendations of the Management Committee set up
under rule 55 of these rules.
(4) Besides police, the Board or Committee shall seek collaboration with non-governmental
organisations to accompany juveniles or children back to their family for restoration.
49

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(5) In case of girls, the juvenile or child shall necessarily be accompanied by female escorts.
(6) The expenses incurred on restoration of a juvenile or child, including travel and other
incidental expenses, shall be borne by the District Child Protection Unit or State Government.
(7) When a juvenile or child expresses his unwillingness to be restored back to the family, the
Board or Committee shall make a note of it in its records in writing and such juvenile or child
shall not be coerced or persuaded to go back to the family, particularly if the social investigation
report of the child welfare officer or probation officer establishes that restoration to family may
not be in the best interest of the juvenile or child or, if the parents or guardians refuse to accept
the juvenile or child back.
(8) A follow-up plan shall be prepared as part of the individual care plans by the Child Welfare
Officers or Probation Officers or non-governmental organisations assigned by the Board or
Committee to assist in restoration of the child.
(9) A quarterly follow-up report shall be submitted to the Board or Committee by the concerned
Child Welfare Officer or Probation Officer or non-governmental organisation for a period of two
years with a copy to the officer-in-charge of the institution from where the juvenile or child is
restored.
(10) The follow-up report shall clearly state the situation of the juvenile or child post restoration
and the juvenile’s or child’s needs to be met by the State Government in order to reduce further
vulnerability of the juvenile or child.
(11) The officer-in-charge shall file the follow-up report in the case-file of the juvenile or child
and place the report before the management committee set up under rule 55 of these rules in its
next meeting.
(12) The officer-in-charge shall also send a copy of the follow-up reports to the District Child
Protection Unit.
(13) Where a follow-up is not possible due to unavailability of government functionaries or non-
governmental organisations, the concerned District Child Protection Unit shall provide necessary
assistance and support to the concerned Board or Committee.
66. Visitor's Book.― (1) A Visitor's Book shall be maintained, in every institution, in which
the person visiting the home shall record the date of his visit with remarks or suggestions, which
he may think proper.
(2) The Officer- in-charge shall forward a copy of every such entry to the District Child
Protection Unit or State Government, with such remarks as he may desire to offer in explanation
or otherwise; and thereon, the designated authority shall issue such orders as he may consider
necessary.
50

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
67. Maintenance of Registers.― The Officer- in-charge shall maintain in his office, such
registers and forms, as required by the Act and as specified by these rules made there under and
the list of registers or files or books to be maintained shall minimally comprise of:
(a) Admission and discharge register;
(b) Supervision register;
(c) Medical file or medical report;
(d) Nutrition diet file;
(e) Stock register;
(f) Log book;
(g) Order book;
(h) Meeting book;
(i) Cash book;
(j) Budget statement file;
(k) Inquiry report file;
(l) Individual case file with individual care plan;
(m) Children’s Suggestion book;
(n) Visitor’s book;
(o) Staff movement register;
(p) Personal belongings register;
(q) Minutes register of Management Committee;
( r) Minutes register of Children’s Committees; and
(s) Attendance register for staff and juveniles or children.
68. Personnel or Staff of a Home.― (1) The personnel strength of a home shall be
determined according to the duty, posts, hours of duty per day and category of children that the
staff is meant to cater to.
(2) The institutional organizational set up shall be fixed in accordance with the size of the home,
the capacity, workload, distribution of functions and requirements of programmes.
(3) The whole-time staff in a home may consist of Officer-in-charge, Probation Officer (in case
of Observation home or Special home), Case Workers (in case of Children's home or shelter
home or after care organization), Child Welfare Officers, Counselor, Educator, Vocational
Training Instructor, Medical Staff, Administrative staff, Care Takers, house father and house
mother, child mentors, volunteers, store keeper, cook, helper, washerman, safai karamchari,
gardener as required.
(4) The part-time staff, shall include Psychiatrist, Psychologist, Occupational therapist, and other
professionals as may be required by time to time.
(5) The staff of the home shall be subject to control and overall supervision of the Officer-in-
charge who by order, shall determine their specific responsibilities and shall keep the concerned
authority informed of such orders made by him from time to time.
(6) The duties and responsibilities of the staff under the Officer-in-charge shall be fixed in
keeping with the statutory requirements of the Act.
51

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(7) The Officer-in-charge and such other staff who may be required, shall live in the quarters
provided for them within the premises of the home.
(8) The number of posts in each category of staff shall be fixed on the basis of capacity of the
institution; and the staff shall be appointed in accordance with the educational qualifications,
training and experience required for each category.
(9) The suggested staffing pattern for an institution with a capacity of 100 juveniles or children
could be as mentioned below:
Sl. No. Staff/Personnel No. of Posts
(1) (2) (3)
1. Officer-in-Charge (Superintendent) 1
2. Counsellor 2
3. Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or Case 3
Worker
4. House Mother or House Father 4
5. Educator 2 (voluntary or part time)
6. Doctor 1
7. Paramedical staff 1
8. Store-keeper cum Accountant 1
9. Art & Craft cum Music Teacher 1 (part time)
10. PT Instructor cum Yoga Trainer 1 (part time)
11. Driver 1
12. Cook 2
13. Helper 2
14. Housekeeping 2
15. Gardener 1 (part time)
Total 25
(10) The number of posts in the category of counsellor, case worker or probation officer, house
father or house mother, educator, and vocational instructor shall proportionally increase with the
increase in the capacity of the institution.
(11) In case of institutions housing infants, provision for ayahs and paramedical staff shall be
made as per the need.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
69. Recognition of fit persons or fit institution.― (1) Any individual who is willing
temporarily to receive a juvenile or child in need of care, protection or treatment for a period as
52

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
may be necessary, may be recognized by the competent authority as a fit person after due
verification of their credentials and reputation.
(2) Any suitable place or institution, the manager of which is willing temporarily to receive a
juvenile or child in need of care and protection for a period as may be necessary, may be
recognized by the State Government as a fit institution on the recommendation of the competent
authority.
(3) An institution recognized as a fit institutions shall,―
(a) meet the standards of care laid down in the Act and the rules made
thereunder;
(b) have the capacity and willingness to meet the standards of care laid down
in the Act and the rules;
(c) receive and provide basic services for care and protection of the juveniles
and children;
(d) prevent subjection of juvenile or child to any form of cruelty or
exploitation or neglect; and
(e) abide by the orders of the competent authority.
(4) A list of fit institutions approved by the State Government shall be kept in the office of
the Board and the Committee.
(5) A fit institution with collateral branches may send the juvenile or child placed therein by
an order of the competent authority to any of its branches after seeking permission from the
competent authority.
(6) Before declaring any person as a fit person or recommending an institution as a fit
institution, the competent authority shall hold due enquiry and only on being satisfied,
recognition shall be given.
70. Certification or recognition and transfer of Management of Institutions and after
care organizations.― (1) Any organization desiring certification under the Act shall make an
application together with a copy each of the rules, bye-laws articles of association, list of
members of the society or the association running the organization, office bearers and a
statement showing the status and past record of specialized childcare services provided by the
organization, to the State Government, who shall after verifying the provisions made in the
organization for the boarding and lodging, general health, educational facilities, vocational
training and treatment services may grant certification or recognition under sections 8, 9, 34, 37,
41 and 44 of the Act, as the case may be, on the condition that the organization shall comply
with the standards or services as laid down under the Act and the rules framed their under, from
time to time and to ensure an all round growth and development of juvenile or child placed under
its charge.
53

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(2) Any organization desiring recognition under the Act shall make an application to the
Competent Authority, who shall after due inquiry, recommend the State Government for such
recognition.
(3) The State Government may, transfer the management of any State run institution under
the Act to a voluntary organization of repute, who has the capacity to run such an institution; and
certify or recognize the said voluntary organization as a fit institution to own the requisite
responsibilities under a Memorandum of Understanding for a specified period of time.
(4) The State Government may, if dissatisfied with the conditions, rules, management of the
organization certified or recognized under the Act, at any time, by notice served on the manager
of the organization, declare that the certificate or recognition of the organization, as the case may
be, shall stand withdrawn as from a date specified in the notice and from the said date, the
organization shall cease to be an organization certified or recognised under sections 8, 9, 34,
37,41 or 44 of the Act, as the case may be:
Provided that the concerned organization shall be given an opportunity of making a
representation in writing, within a period of thirty days, against the grounds of withdrawal of
certificate or recognition of that organization.
(5) The decision to withdraw or to restore the certificate or recognition of the organization
may be taken, on the basis of a thorough investigation by a specially constituted advisory board
under section 62 of the Act.
(6) On the report of the advisory board, the Officer- in- charge of the institution shall be
asked to show cause so as to give an explanation within thirty days.
(7) When an organization ceases to be an organization, certified or recognised under sections
8, 9, 34, 37,41 or 44 of the Act, the juvenile or the child kept therein shall, be transferred to
some other institution of repute, certified or recognized under sections 8, 9, 34, 37,41 or 44 of the
Act or discharged, in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules relating to their
discharge and transfer by giving intimation of such discharge or transfer to the Board or the
Committee, as the case may be.
71. Registration under the Act.― (1) All institutions and organisations running institutional
or non-institutional care services for children in need of care and protection, whether run by the
government or voluntary organization, shall get themselves registered under sub-section (3) of
section 34 of the Act.
(2) All such institutions shall make an application together with a copy each of rules, bye-laws,
memorandum of association, list of governing body, office bearers, balance sheet of past three
years, statement of past record of social or public service provided by the institution or
organization to the State Government, who shall after verifying that provisions made in the
institution or organization for the care and protection of children, health, education, boarding and
lodging facilities, if any, vocational facilities and scope of rehabilitation, may issue a registration
certificate to such organization under sub-section (3) of section 34 of the Act and as per this rule.
54

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
72. Grant in aid to certified or recognized organization.― (1) An organization certified or
recognized or registered under sections 8, 9, 34, sub-section (3) of section 34, 37 or 44 of the
Act, may during the period when certification or recognition or registration is in force, may
apply for grants-in-aid by the State Government, for the maintenance of juvenile or child
received by them under the provisions of the Act; and for expenses incurred on their education,
treatment, vocational training, development and rehabilitation.
(2) The grants-in-aid may be admissible, at such rates, which shall be sufficient to meet the
prescribed norms, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be mutually agreed to
by both the parties.
(3) In case of transfer of management of government run homes under sections 8, 9, 34, sub-
section (3) of section 34, 37 and 44 of the Act to a voluntary organization, the same budget
which the Government was spending on that home, shall be given to the voluntary organization
as grant-in-aid under the Memorandum of Understanding signed between both the parties
describing their role and obligations.
73. Admission of outsiders.― (1) No stranger shall be admitted to the premises of the
institution, except with the permission of the Officer- in-charge or on an order from the Board or
Committee.
(2) In special cases, where parents or guardians have travelled a long distance from another state
or district, the Officer-in-Charge shall allow parents or guardians entry into the premises and a
meeting with their children, provided they possess proper identification and are not reported to
have subjected the juvenile or child to abuse and exploitation.
74. Identity Photos.― (1) On admission to a home established under the Act, every juvenile
or child shall be photographed
(2) One photograph shall be kept in the case file of the juvenile or the child, one shall be fixed
with the index card, a copy shall be kept in an album serially numbered with the negative in
another album, and a copy of the photograph shall be sent to the Board or Committee as case
may be, as well as to the district or State Child Protection Unit.
(3) In case of a child missing from an institution or in case of lost children received by an
institution, a photograph of the child with relevant details shall be sent to the missing person’s
bureau and the local police station.
75. Police Officers to be in plain clothes.― While dealing with a juvenile or a child under
the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder, except at the time of arrest, the Police
Officer shall wear plain clothes and not the police uniform.
76. Prohibition on the use of handcuffs and fetters.― No child or the juvenile in conflict
with law dealt with under the provisions of the Act and the rules made there under shall be
handcuffed or fettered.
55

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
77. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate not empowered under the Act.― (1) When
any juvenile or child is produced before a Magistrate other than Board or Committee, and the
Magistrate is of the opinion that such person is a juvenile or child, he shall record his reasons and
send the juvenile or child to the appropriate competent authority.
(2) In case of a juvenile produced before a Magistrate not empowered under this Act, such
Magistrate shall direct the case to be transferred to the Board for inquiry and disposal.
(3) In case of a child in need of care and protection produced as a victim of a crime before a
Magistrate not empowered under the Act, such Magistrate shall transfer the matter concerning
care and protection, rehabilitation and restoration of the child to the appropriate Committee.
78. Transfer.―(1) During the inquiry, if it is found that the juvenile or child hails from a
place outside the jurisdiction of the Board or Committee, the Board or Committee shall order the
transfer of the juvenile or child and send a copy of the order to the State Government or State or
District Child Protection Unit.
Provided that:
(i) such transfer is in the best interest of the juvenile or child;
(ii) no child shall be transferred or proposed to be transferred only on the ground that the
child has created problems or, has become difficult to be managed in the existing institution
or, is suffering from a chronic or terminal illness or, on account of disability;
(iii) such transfer shall only take place after the completion of evidence and cross;
examination that may be required in a legal proceeding involving a juvenile or child; and
(iv) the reasons for and circumstances of such transfer are recorded in writing.
(2) The State Government or State or District Child Protection Unit shall accordingly:
(i) send the information of transfer to the appropriate competent authority having
jurisdiction over the area where the child is ordered to be transferred by the Board or
Committee; and
(ii) send a copy of the information to the Officer-in-charge of the institution where
the child is placed for care and protection at the time of the transfer order.
(3) On receipt of copy of the information from the State Government or State or District Child
Protection Unit, the Officer-in-charge shall arrange to escort the child at government expenses to
the place or person as specified in the order.
(4) On such transfer, case file and records of the juvenile or child shall be sent along with the
juvenile or child.
79. Procedure for sending a juvenile or child outside the jurisdiction of the competent
authority.― (1) In the case of a juvenile or a child whose ordinary place of residence lies
outside the jurisdiction of the competent authority, and if the competent authority considers it
necessary to take action under section 50 of the Act, it shall direct a probation officer or case
worker or child welfare officer, as the case may be, to make enquiries as to the fitness and
56

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
willingness of the relative or other person to receive the juvenile or the child at the ordinary
place of residence, and whether such relative or other fit person can exercise proper care and
control over the juvenile or the child.
(2) Where a juvenile or child is ordered to be sent to the ordinary place of residence or to a
relative or fit person, execution of a bond by the juvenile or child without any surety, in Form
VI, is necessary along with an undertaking by the said relative or fit person in Form V or IX as
the case may be.
(3) Any breach of a bond or undertaking or of both given under sub-rule (2) of this rule, shall
render the juvenile liable to be brought before the competent authority, who may make an order
directing the juvenile to be sent to an institution home.
(4) Any juvenile or a child, who is a foreign national and who has lost contact with his family
shall also be entitled for protection.
(5) The juvenile or the child, who is a foreign national, shall be repatriated, at the earliest, to the
country of his origin in co-ordination with the respective Embassy or High Commission.
(6) The Board or Committee shall keep the Ministry of External Affairs informed about
repatriation of every juvenile or child of foreign nationality carried out on the orders of the Board
or Committee.
(7) A copy of the order passed by the competent authority under section 50 of the Act shall be
sent to-
(a) the probation officer or child welfare officer who was directed to submit a report under
sub-rule (1) of this rule;
(b) the probation officer or child welfare officer, if any, having jurisdiction over the place
where the juvenile or the child is to be sent;
(c) the competent authority having jurisdiction over the place where the juvenile or the
child is to be sent; and
(d) the relative or the person who is to receive the juvenile or the child.
(8) During the pendency of the order under sub-rule (6) of this rule, the juvenile or the child
shall be sent by the competent authority to an observation home or children’s home as the case
may be.
(9) Where the competent authority considers it expedient to send the juvenile or the child
back to his ordinary place of residence under section 50, the competent authority shall inform the
relative or the fit person, who is to receive the juvenile or the child accordingly; and shall invite
the said relative or fit person to come to the home, to take charge of the juvenile or the child on
such date, as may be specified by the competent authority.
(10) The competent authority inviting the said relative or fit person under sub-rule (8) of this
rule may also direct, if necessary, the payment to be made by the Officer-in-charge of the home,
57

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
of the actual expenses of the relative or fit person’s journey both ways, by the appropriate class
and the juvenile’s or child’s journey from the home to his ordinary place of residence, at the time
of sending the juvenile or the child.
(11) If the relative or the fit person fails to come to take charge of the juvenile or the child on
the specified date, the juvenile or the child shall be taken to his ordinary place of residence by
the escort of the observation home and in the case of a girl, at least one escort shall be a female.
80. State Child Protection Unit.― The specific functions of the State Child Protection Unit
shall include:
(a) implementation of the Act and supervision and monitoring of agencies and institutions
under the Act;
(b) set up, support and monitor the District Child Protection Units;
(c) represent State Child Protection Unit as a member in the Selection Committee for
appointment of members of Boards or Committees;
(d) make necessary funds available to the District Child Protection Units for providing or
setting up required facilities to implementation the Act;
(e) network and coordinate with all government departments to build inter-sectoral linkages
on child protection issues, including Departments of Health, Education, Social Welfare, Urban
Basic Services, Backward Classes & Minorities, Youth Services, Police, Judiciary, Labour, State
AIDS Control Society, among others;
(f) network and coordinate with civil society organizations working for the effective
implementation of the Act;
(g) training and capacity building of all personnel (Government and Non-government)
working under the Act;
(h) establish Minimum Standards of Care and ensure its implementation in all institutions set
up under the Act;
(i) review of the functioning of Committees; and
(j) all other functions necessary for effective implementation of the Act.
81. District Child Protection Unit.―(1) The District Child Protection Unit shall coordinate
and implement all child rights and protection activities at district level.
(2) The specific functions of the District Child Protection Unit shall include:
(a) ensure effective implementation of the Act at district or city levels by supporting creation
of adequate infrastructure, such as, setting up Boards, Committees, Special Juvenile
Police Units and homes in each districts;
(b) identify families at risk and children in need of care and protection;
(c) assess the number of children in difficult circumstances and creating district-specific
databases to monitor trends and patterns of children in difficult circumstances;
(d) periodic and regular mapping of all child related services at district for creating a
resource directory and making the information available to the Committees and Boards
from time to time;
(e) implement family based non-institutional services including sponsorship, foster care,
adoption and after care;
58

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(f) ensure setting up of District, Block and Village level Child Protection Committees for
effective implementation of programmes as well as discharge of its functions;
(g) facilitate transfer of children at all levels for either their restoration to their families or
placing the child in long or short-term rehabilitation through institutionalization,
adoption, foster care and sponsorship;
(h) supporting State Adoption Resource Agency in implementation of family based non-
institutional services at district level;
(i) network and coordinate with all government departments to build inter-sectoral linkages
on child protection issues, including Departments of Health, Education, Social Welfare,
Urban Basic Services, Backward Classes & Minorities, Youth Services, Police, Judiciary,
Labour, State AIDS Control Society, among others;
(j) network and coordinate with civil society organizations working under the Act;
(k) develop parameters and tools for effective monitoring and supervision of agencies and
institutions in the district in consultation with experts in child welfare;
(l) supervise and monitor all institutions or agencies providing residential facilities to
children in district;
(m) train and build capacity of all personnel (Government and Non-government)
implementing the Act to provide effective services to children;
(n) organize quarterly meeting with all stakeholders at district level including CHILDLINE,
Specialised Adoption Agencies, Officer-in-charges of homes, non-governmental
organisations and members of public to review the progress and implementation of the
Act; and
(o) liaison with the State Child Protection Unit, State Adoption Resource Agency at State
level and District Child Protection Units of other districts.
82. Setting of the Child Welfare Committee.― (1) The State Government shall set up by
notification in Official Gazette Child Welfare Committees under section 29 of the Act in every
district with requisite infrastructure, personnel, and finances for smooth running, as listed below:
(a) the infrastructure shall consist of a sitting hall, a separate room for the Committee,
room for office staff, waiting room for children, waiting room for parents or guardian,
room for personal interaction between the child or parents and the Committee, a record
room, safe drinking water facility and toilets;
(b) the State Government shall provide necessary human resource support for every
Committee, including welfare officer, steno-typist or computer operator, peon, safai
karamchari.
(2) The allowances of the Chairperson and Members shall be disbursed by the District Child
Protection Unit or State Government as per rule 23 of these rules.
83. Setting up of Juvenile Justice Board.― The State Government shall set up by
notification in Official Gazette, Juvenile Justice Board in every district, with requisite
infrastructure, personnel, besides the Principal Magistrate and Members and Finances as listed
below:
59

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(1) Infrastructure shall consist of a Board Room, waiting room for children, a room
for Principal Magistrate and Members, a record room, room for Probation Officers,
waiting room for parents and visitors, safe drinking water facility and toilets.
(2) The State Government shall provide necessary human resource support for every
Board, including probation officer, steno-typist or computer operator, peon, safai
karamchari.
84. Special Juvenile Police Unit.― (1) The State Government shall appoint a Special
Juvenile Police Unit at the District level within four months of the notification of these rules and
the unit shall consist of a juvenile or child welfare officer of the rank of police inspector and two
paid social workers having experience of working in the field of child welfare, of whom one
shall be a woman.
(2) The District Child Protection Unit or the State Government shall provide services of its two
social workers to the Special Juvenile Police Unit for discharging their duties.
(3) The juvenile or child welfare officer at the police station shall be a person with aptitude and
appropriate training and orientation to handle the cases of juveniles or children in terms of the
provisions of the Act.
(4) The transfer and posting of the designated Juvenile or Child Welfare Officer shall be
within the Special Juvenile Police Units of other police stations or district unit, unless there is an
exceptional case of promotion and in such cases, other police officer must be designated and
deputed in the unit so that there is no shortfall.
(5) Special Juvenile Police Unit at district level shall coordinate and function as a watch-dog
for providing legal protection against all kinds of cruelty, abuse and exploitation of child or
juvenile.
(6) The unit shall take serious cognizance of adult perpetrators of crimes against children and
see to it that they are without delay apprehended and booked under the appropriate provisions of
the law and for this purpose the district level units shall maintain liaison with other units of
police station.
(7) The Special Juvenile Police Units shall seek assistance from the voluntary organizations,
panchayats and gramsabhas or Resident Welfare Associations in identifying juveniles in conflict
with law as well as reporting cases of violence against children, child neglect and child abuse.
(8) The Special Juvenile Police Units shall particularly seek assistance from voluntary
organizations recognized as protection agencies by the State Government for the purpose of
assisting Special Juvenile Police Units and local police stations at the time of apprehension, in
preparation of necessary reports, for taking charge of juveniles until production and at the time of
production before the Board as per rule 11 (12) of these rules.
60

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(9) The Superintendent of Police in a district shall head the Special Juvenile Police Unit and
oversee its functioning from time to time.
(10) A Nodal Officer from Police not less than the rank of Inspector General of Police shall be
designated in each State to coordinate and upgrade role of police on all issues pertaining to care
and protection of children or juveniles under Act.
(11) Any police officer found guilty, after due inquiry, of torturing a child, mentally or
physically, shall be liable to be removed from service, besides being prosecuted for the offence.
85. Honorary or Voluntary Welfare Officers and Probation Officers.― To augment the
existing probation service, honorary or voluntary welfare officers and probation officers may be
appointed from the voluntary organization and social workers found fit for the purpose by the
competent authority and their services may also be co-opted into the implementation machinery
by the orders of the competent authority.
86. Duties of the Officer-in-Charge of an institution.― (1) The Officer-in-charge shall
have the primary responsibility of maintaining the institution and shall stay within the
institutional premises to be readily available as and when required by the juveniles or children
and the staff and in case where an accommodation is not available within the institutional
premises, the Officer-in-charge shall stay at a place in close proximity to the institution till such
time that such an accommodation is made available within the institution.
(2) The general duties and functions of the Officer-in-charge shall include:
(a) compliance with provisions of the Act and the rules and orders made thereunder;
(b) compliance with the orders of the Board or Committee;
(c) providing homely atmosphere of love, affection, care, development and welfare for
juveniles or children;
(d) maintaining minimum standards of care in the institution;
(e) proper maintenance of buildings and premises;
(f) security measures and periodical inspection, including daily inspection and rounds of the
institution, proper storage and inspection of food stuffs as well as food being served;
(g) supervision and monitoring of juveniles' or children’s discipline and well being;
(h) planning implementation and coordination of all institutional activities, programmes and
operations, including training and treatment programmes or correctional activities as the
case may be;
(i) prompt action to meet emergencies;
(j) ensuring accident and fire preventive measures within the institutional premises;
(k) stand-by arrangements for water storage, power plant, emergency lighting;
(l) careful handling of plants and equipments;
(m) segregation of a juvenile or child suffering from contagious or infectious diseases;
(n) observance and follow-up of daily routine;
(o) filing of monthly report of juvenile or child in the case file;
(p) organize local and national festivals in the institution;
(q) organize trips or excursions or picnics for juveniles or children;
61

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(r) preparation of budget and control over financial matters;
(s) allocation of duties to personnel;
(t) supervision over office administration, including attending to personnel welfare and staff
discipline;
(u) prompt, firm and considerate handling of all disciplinary matters;
(v) organize the meetings of the Management Committee set up under rule 55 of these rules and
provide necessary support
(w) maintenance of all records and registers required under the Act and the rules and monthly
verification of the same by the Management Committee set up under rule 55 of these
rules;
(x) liaison, coordination and cooperation with the District Child Protection Unit or State
Government as and when required; and
(y) coordination with the legal officer in the District Child Protection Unit to ensure that every
juvenile is legally represented and provided free legal aid and other necessary support or,
where the District Child Protection Unit has not been set up, services of the District or
State Legal Services Authority shall be made available.
87. Duties of a Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker.― (1)
Every probation officer or child welfare officer or case-worker shall carry out all directions given
by the Board or Committee or concerned authority and shall perform the following duties,
functions and responsibilities:
(a) making social investigation of the juvenile (Form IV) or the child (Form XIII) through
personal interview and from the family, social agencies and other sources;
(b) attending the proceedings of the Board or Committee and submitting reports as and when
required;
(c) clarifying problems of the juvenile or the child and dealing with their difficulties in
institutional life;
(d) participating in the orientation, monitoring, education, vocational and rehabilitation
programmes;
(e) establishing co-operation and understanding between the juvenile or the child and the
Officer- in-charge;
(f) assisting the juvenile or the child to develop contacts with family and also providing
assistance to family members;
(g) developing a care plan for every child in consultation with the juvenile or child and
following up its implementation;
(h) participating in the pre-release programme and helping the juvenile or the child to
establish contacts which can provide emotional and social support to juvenile or child
after their release;
(i) establishing linkages with voluntary workers and organizations to facilitate rehabilitation
and social reintegration of juveniles and to ensure the necessary follow-up;
(j) follow-up of juveniles after their release and extending help and guidance to them;
(k) visiting regularly the residence of the juvenile or child under their supervision and also
places of employment or school attended by such juvenile or child and submitting
fortnightly reports as prescribed in Form XXI;
62

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(l) accompanying juveniles or children where ever possible, from the office of the Board to
observation home, special home, children's home or fit person, as the case may be; and
(m) maintaining case file and such registers as may be specified from time to time.
(2) On receipt of information from the Police or Juvenile or Child Welfare Officer of the
Police under clause (b) of section 13 of the Act, the probation officer shall inquire into the
antecedents and family history of the juvenile or the child and such other material circumstances,
as may be necessary and submit a social investigation report as early as possible, in Form IV or
XIII, to the Board.
88. Duties of House Father or House Mother.― (1) The general duties, functions and
responsibilities of a house father, house mother and other care takers shall be as follows:
(a) handling juvenile or child with love and affection;
(b) taking proper care and welfare of juvenile or child;
(c) maintaining discipline among the juveniles or children;
(d) maintenance, sanitation and hygiene;
(e) implementing daily routine in an effective manner and ensuring children's involvement;
(f) looking after the security and safety arrangements of the home; and
(g) escorting juveniles or children, whenever they go out of the home.
89. Disqualification for officer-in-charge, probation officer or child welfare officer or
case-worker, house father or house mother and other care givers and staff.― (1) The
officer-in-charge, probation officer or child welfare officer or case-worker, house father or house
mother and other care givers and staff shall not employ a juvenile or child under their
supervision or care and protection for their own purposes or take any private service from them.
(2) Any report of physical, sexual or emotional abuse of a juvenile or a child in an institution or
outside, by a caregiver, shall hold them liable for disqualification after due inquiry.
90. Training of Personnel.― (1) The State Government or the Officer-in-charge shall
provide for training of personnel of each category of staff, in keeping with their statutory
responsibilities and specific jobs requirements.
(2) The training programme shall include-
(a) orientation and induction training of the newly-recruited staff,
(b) refresher training courses and skill enhancement programmes for all care givers once a
year, and
(c) staff conferences, seminars, workshops
(3) The State Government with the help of the State Child Protection Unit, National Institute of
Public Cooperation and Child Development and its Regional Centres shall organize regular
training and capacity building of personnel involved in the implementation of the Act and the
rules made thereunder.
63

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
91. Selection Committee and its composition.― The State Government shall constitute a
Selection Committee by notification in the official gazette, for a period of five years, consisting
of the following seven members, namely:
(a) a retired judge of High Court as the Chairperson;
(b) one representative from the concerned Department of State Government not below the
rank of Director as the Member Secretary;
(c) two representatives from a reputed non-governmental organization, working in the area
of child welfare;
(d) two representatives from academic bodies concerned with social work, psychology,
sociology, child development, education, law, criminology and with experience of
working on children’s issues; and
(e) a representative of the National or State Human Rights Commission or, National or State
Commission for Protection of Child Rights or, National or State Commission for Women.
92. Functions of the Selection Committee.― (1) (a) In making appointment of members of
the Board or Committee, the Selection Committee shall take into consideration the applications
received in this regard in response to a public advertisement to this effect by the District or State
Child Protection Unit or the State Government; and
(b) the Selection Committee shall select and recommend a panel of names to the State Child
Protection Unit or State Government for appointment as members of the Board or
Committee from amongst the applications received.
(2) In the event of any complaint against a member of the Board or Committee, the Selection
Committee shall hold necessary inquiry and recommend termination of appointment of such
member to the State Child Protection Unit or State Government, if required.
(3) (a) The Selection Committee, at the time of recommending names for appointment as
member of Board or Committee shall also prepare a panel of names for each Board or
Committee to fill in vacancies, which may arise during the tenure of the Board or Committee.
(b) In the event of a vacancy in the Board or Committee, the District Child Protection Unit shall
inform the State Child Protection Unit or State Government for filling up such vacancy.
(c) The State Child Protection Unit or State Government shall fill the vacancies on the basis of
the panel of names recommended by the Selection Committee.
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend names for constitution of the State or District
or City level Inspection Committees as required under section 35 of the Act.
93. Advisory Boards.― (1) The Central Government and the State Government shall
constitute Advisory Board at Central, State, District, City levels for a period of three years.
(2) The Central Advisory Board shall be constituted through the Union Ministry of Women and
Child Development.
64

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(3) The State Government shall constitute the State Advisory Board, District Advisory Board and
the City Advisory Board.
(4) All the Advisory Boards shall hold at least two meetings in a year.
(5) These Advisory Boards shall inspect the various institutional or non-institutional services in
their respective jurisdictions; and the recommendations made by them, shall be acted upon by the
Central Government and the State Government.
(6) The Central Government through the Central Ministry of Women and Child Development
shall set up the Central Advisory Board to be headed by the Minister concerned and shall consist
of the Secretary of the Ministry aforesaid, representatives from State Governments,
representative members from the competent authority, leading non-governmental organisations,
experts in child or juvenile care, children's institution and academic institutions as members.
(7) A designated official of the Central Ministry of Women and Child Development shall
function as the Member Secretary of the Central Advisory Board.
(8) The State Government, through the Selection Committee constituted under rule 91 of these
rules, shall set up State, District and City level Advisory Boards, which shall consist of
representatives of the State Government, members of the competent authority, academic
institutions, locally respectable and spirited citizens, representatives of non-governmental
organizations.
(9) The District or City level Advisory Board constituted in terms of sub-section (3) of section 62
of the Act shall also function as the inspection committee under section 35 of the Act.
(10) The termination, resignation, or other vacancy caused in an advisory board and appointment
of new members therein shall be done in the same manner as is done in case of the competent
authority.
94. Openness & Transparency.― (1) All Children's homes shall be open to visitors with
the permission of the Officer-in-charge and the Committee or Officer-in-charge as the case may
be, may consider appropriate to allow representatives of local self government, voluntary
organizations, social workers, researchers, medicos, academicians, prominent personalities,
media and any other persons as visitors, as the Officer-in-charge considers appropriate keeping
in view the security, welfare and the interest of the children.
(2) The Officer-in-charge of the home shall encourage active involvement of local community in
improving the conditions in the homes, if, the members of the community want to serve the
institution or want to contribute through their expertise.
(3) The Officer-in-charge shall maintain a visitors book and the remarks of the visitors given
therein shall be considered by the advisory inspecting authority.
65

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(4) While visiting an institution, the visitors will not say or do anything that undermines the
authority of the Officer-in-charge or is in contravention of the Act or rules or impinges on the
dignity of the children.
(5) The visitors may be allowed to visit observation homes and special homes with the
permission of the competent authority.
95. Juvenile Justice Fund.― (1) The State Government shall create a Fund at the State level
under section 61 of the Act to be called the 'Juvenile Justice Fund' (herein under referred to as
the Fund) for the welfare and rehabilitation of the juvenile or the child dealt with under the
provisions of the Act.
(2) In addition to donations, contributions or subscriptions coming under sub-section (2) of
section 61, the Central Government shall also make contribution to the Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be applied:
(a) to implement programmes for the welfare, rehabilitation and restoration of juveniles or
children;
(b) to pay grant-in-aid to non-governmental organizations;
(c) to meet the expenses of State Advisory Board and its purpose;
(d) to do all other things that are incidental and necessary for the above purposes.
(4) The management and administration of the Fund shall be under the control of the State
Advisory Board under sub-section (3) of section 61 of the Act.
(5) The assets of the Fund shall include all such grants and contributions, recurring or non-
recurring, from the Central Government and State Government or any other statutory or non-
statutory bodies set up by the Central or State Government as well as the voluntary donations
from any individual or organization.
(6) All withdrawals shall be made by cheques or requisitions, as the case may be, signed by the
secretary-cum-treasurer and in the case of amounts exceeding rupees one thousand, they shall be
signed duly by the secretary-cum-treasurer and a member of the board of management to be
nominated by the State Advisory Board.
(7) The regular accounts shall be kept of all money and properties, and all incomes and
expenditure of the Fund and shall be audited by a notified firm of Chartered Accountants, or any
other recognized authorities as may be appointed by the Board.
(8) The auditors shall also certify the expenditure from the Fund made by the secretary-cum-
treasurer.
66

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(9) All contracts and other assurances shall be in the name of the board of management and
signed on their behalf by the secretary-cum-treasurer and one member of the board of the
management authorised by it for the purpose.
(10) The board of management shall invest for the time being the proceeds of sale or other
disposal of the property, as well as any money or property not immediately required to be used to
serve the objective of the Fund, in any one or more of the modes of investment authorised by law
for the investment of trust moneys as the board of management may think proper.
(11) The board of management may delegate to one or more of the members such of its powers,
which in its opinion are merely a procedural arrangement.
96. Application of these rules.― It is hereby declared that until the new rules conforming to
these rules are framed by the State Government concerned under section 68 of the Act, these
rules shall mutatis mutandis apply in that State.
97. Pending Cases.― (1) No juvenile in conflict with law or a child shall be denied the
benefits of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
(2) All pending cases which have not received a finality shall be dealt with and disposed of in
terms of the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
(3) Any juvenile in conflict with law, or a child shall be given the benefits under sub-rule (1) of
this rule, and it is hereby clarified that such benefits shall be made available to all those accused
who were juvenile or a child at the time of commission of an offence, even if they cease to be a
juvenile or a child during the pendency of any inquiry or trial.
(4) While computing the period of detention or stay or sentence of a juvenile in conflict with law
or of a child, all such period which the juvenile or the child has already spent in custody,
detention, stay or sentence of imprisonment shall be counted as a part of the period of stay or
detention or sentence of imprisonment contained in the final order of the court or the Board.
98. Disposed off cases of juveniles in conflict with law.― The State Government or as the
case may be the Board may, either suo motu or on an application made for the purpose, review
the case of a person or a juvenile in conflict with law, determine his juvenility in terms of the
provisions contained in the Act and rule 12 of these rules and pass an appropriate order in the
interest of the juvenile in conflict with law under section 64 of the Act, for the immediate release
of the juvenile in conflict with law whose period of detention or imprisonment has exceeded the
maximum period provided in section 15 of the said Act.
99. Disposal of records or documents.― The records or documents in respect of a juvenile
or a child or a juvenile in conflict with law shall be kept in a safe place for a period of seven
years and no longer, and thereafter be destroyed by the Officer-in-charge or Board or
Committee, as the case may be.
67

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
100. Repeal.― The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2001, notified
vide F.No.1-3 /2001-SD, dated the 22nd June, 2001 in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part I,
Section 1 of the same date is hereby repealed.
SCHEDULE – I
Clothing, bedding, toiletries and other articles (rule 41)
(1) Juveniles or children shall be provided with the following articles:
Bedding
S.No. Article Quantity to be provided per child
1. Towels 4 per Year
2. Cotton Bed Sheets 2 per 2 Year
3. Pillow (Cotton stuffed) 1 per 2 Year
4. Pillow Covers 2 per 2 Year
5. Woolen blankets 2 per 2 years
6. Cotton Durry 2 per 2 years
7. Cotton filled quilt 1 per 2 years (in cold regions)
8. Mattress 1 per 2 years
9. Mosquito Net 1 per 2 years
Clothing for girls
1. Skirts & Blouse or Salwar Kameez 5 sets per year for girls depending on age and
or Half Sari with blouses and regional preferences
petticoats
2. Banyans (1 Metre each) 6 per year for younger girls
3. Brassieres 6 per year for older girls
4. Panties (1 Metre Cloth each) 6 per year
5. Sanitary Towels 12 packs per year for older girls
6. Woolen Sweaters 2 in 2 years (in cold regions)
7. Woolen Shawls 1 in 2 years (in cold regions)
Clothing for boys
1. Shirts 5 sets per year
2. Shorts 5 sets per year for younger boys
3. Pants 5 sets per year for older boys
4. Vest 4 sets per year
5. Underwear 4 sets per year
6. Woolen Jerseys 2 in 2 years (for cold regions)
7. Scarfs 2 in 2 years (for cold regions)
68

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Miscellaneous Articles
1. Slippers 1 pair per year
2. Shoes 1 pair per year
3. School Uniform 2 sets per year for children attending outside schools
4. School Shoes 1 pair per year for children attending outside schools
5. School Bag and Stationery 1 set per year for children attending outside schools
6. Handkerchiefs 6 per year
Note:
a) In addition to the clothing specified above, each child shall be provided, once in three
years, with a suit consisting of one white shirt, one pair of Khaki shorts or pants, one pair
of white canvas shoes and one blazer (for cold regions) for use during ceremonial
occasions. In the case of girls it shall be one white half sari or one salwar kameez or one
white skirt and one white blouse, a pair of white canvas shoes and a blazer (for cold
regions).
(2) In every hospital attached to the institution where there is provision for in-patient cots,
the following scale has to be followed:
Night clothing & bedding Scale for supply
1 Mattress One per bed per 3 years
2 Cotton Bed Sheets Four per bed per year
3 Pillows One per bed per two year
4 Pillow Covers Four per bed per year
5 Woollen blankets One per bed per 2 years
6 Pyjamas and loose shirts (Hospital type for boys) 3 pairs per child per year
7 Skirts and blouses or salwar kameez for girls 3 pairs per child per year
8 Cotton durry One per bed per three years
Note:
(i) When a child is admitted as an in-patient in the institution Hospital, the Institution Doctor
shall issue the in-patient with the hospital clothing, the clothes on body being preserved,
duly washed and handed back, at the time of the child’s discharge from the hospital.
(ii) Each child shall be provided with Kit Box or a Locker, as per convenience and necessity.
(iii) The Superintendent shall make arrangements for two-tier bed system in place of
conventional cots, as per convenience and necessity.
69

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(3) Toiletry: Every resident of the Home shall be issued with oil, soap, and other material
for in accordance with the following scales:
Hair oil for grooming the hair 100 mls per month
Toilet soap or carbolic soap 1 large bar per month
Tooth paste and brush 1 Brush per 3 months 50 gms paste per
month
Comb 1 per year
Note:
(a) For washing of cloth and towels, bed-sheet etc., the following scale may be followed:
(i) Washing Soap 1 soap for one month (125 gms)
(ii) Whitening/bleaching agent to the extent required only for white clothing
Provided, however, the hospital clothing is not mixed with other clothing at the time of
washing and if necessary, the Superintendent can issue the above items separately for
washing of hospital clothing.
(b) The children attending school outside the institution may be issued with one additional
bar of washing soap (100 gms) per head per month for washing their school uniform.
(4) The following items shall be provided for maintaining the Homes in a healthy and
sanitary condition:
Item Scale of supply
(1) Broom Stick 25 to 40 Nos per month depending on the
area of the institution
(2) DDT spray As per the institution Doctor’s advice
(3) Effective bugs killing agent As required
(4) Phenyl and cleaning acid (daily) Depending on the area of lavatories to be
cleaned as per institution Doctor’s advice
70

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
SCHEDULE – II
Nutrition and Diet Scale (rule 44)
Name of the articles of diet Scale per head per day
(1) Rice/Wheat/Ragi/Jowar 600 Gms, (700 Gms for16-18 yrs age) of which
atleast 100 gms to be either Wheat or Ragi or
Jowar
(2) Dal/ Rajma/ Chana 120 Gms
(3) Edible Oil 25 Gms
(4) Onion 25 Gms
(5) Salt 25 Gms
(6) Turmeric 05 Gms
(7) Coriander Seed Powder 05 Gms
(8) Ginger 05 Gms
(9) Garlic 05 Gms
(10) Tamarind/ Mango powder 05 Gms
(11) Milk (at breakfast) 150 ml
(12) Dry Chillies 05 Gms
(13) Vegetables Leafy 100 Gms
Non-leafy 130 Gms
(14) Curd or Butter Milk 100 Gms/Ml
(15) Chicken once a week or Eggs 4 days 115 Gms
(16) Jaggery & Ground Nut Seeds or 60 Gms each (100 Gms for paneer) Once in a
Paneer (vegetarian only) week
(17) Sugar 40 Gms
Following items for 50 Children per day
(18) Pepper 25 Gms
(19) Jeera Seeds 25 Gms
(20) Black Gramdall 50 Gms
(21) Mustard Seeds 50 Gms
(22) Ajwain Seeds 50 Gms
On Chicken Day for 10 Kg. of Chicken
(23) Garam Masala 10 Gms
(24) Kopra 150 Gms
(25) Khas Khas 150 Gms
(26) Groundnut Oil 500 Gms
For Sick Children
(27) Bread 500 Gms
(28) Milk 500 Ml
Other Items
(29) LP Gas for Cooking only
71

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Instructions:
(2) Variation in Diet
(a) Three varieties of dal i.e., Toor (Tuvari), Moong (Green Gram) and Chana (Bengal
Gram) may be issued alternatively.
(b) The Superintendent may also arrange to substitute chicken with fish at his discretion,
provided that there is no extra expenditure to Government.
(c) On non-vegetarian days, vegetarian children shall be issued with either 60 Gms of
Jaggery and 60 Gms of Groundnut seeds per head in the shape of laddus or any other
sweet dish or 100 gms paneer.
(d) Potatoes shall be issued in lieu of vegetables once in a week.
(e) Leafy vegetables such as Fenugreek(Methi), Spinach (Palak), Sarson (Mustard
leaves)Gongura Thotakura or any other saag etc., may also be issued once in a week . If a
kitchen garden is attached to any institution leafy vegetables, in addition to drumstick
trees, curry leaves trees and coriander leaves, should be grown and issued and the
Superintendent should try to issue variety of vegetables and see that the same vegetable is
not repeated for at least a period of one week.
(f) The Superintendent may make temporary alternations in the scale of diet in individual
cases when considered necessary by him, or on the institution Doctor’s advice subject to
the condition that the scale laid down is not exceeded.
(3) Meal Timing and Menu:
a) Breakfast after 8:00 am
(i) Upma or chapattis made of Wheat or Ragi or any other dish.
(ii) Chutneys from Gongura or fresh curry leave or fresh coriander or Coconut and
Putnadal etc., dal/vegetable may be issued as a dish.
(iii) Milk
(iv) Any seasonal fruit in sufficient quantity
b) Lunch at 1:00 P.M. and Dinner After 7:00 P.M.
(i) Rice/ Chapattis or combination of both
(ii) Vegetable Curry
(iii) Sambar or Dal
(iv) Butter Milk or curd
(4) Others:
(a) Depending on the season, the Superintendent shall have the discretion to alter the
time for distribution of food .
(b) On the advise of the Institution Doctor, every sick child who is prevented from
taking regular food, on account of his ill-health, may be issued with medical diet,
as indicated in diet scale.
(c) Extra diet for nourishment like milk, eggs, sugar and fruits shall be issued to the
children on the advice of the institution Doctor in addition to the regular diet, to
pick up weight or for other health reasons and for the purpose of calculation of the
daily ration, the sick children shall be excluded from the day’s strength.
72

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(d) On the following national and festival occasions, sweet dishes may be distributed
to all the children at the Home at the rate fixed by the Commissioner, from time to
time.
1. Republic Day (26th January )
2. Ambedkar’s Birthday (14th April)
3. Independence Day(15th August)
4. Mahatma Gandhi’s Birth Day (2nd October)
5. Children’s Day (14th November)
6. Child Rights Day (20th November)
7. Dussehra (Vijayadasami)
8. Deepavali
9. Ramzan (Id-Ul-Fitr)
10. Bakrid (Id-Ul-Zuha)
11. Christmas (25th December)
The States may specify additional festivals depending upon local preferences.
[F. No.1-2/2004-CW-II (Pt)]
Dr. LOVELEEN KACKER
JOINT SECRETARY
73

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM-I
[Rule 13(1)(c) ]
SUPERVISION ORDER
When the Juvenile is placed under the care of a parent, guardian or other fit person/fit institution
Profile No. _________________________ of _________________________ 20 ____.
Whereas (name of the juvenile/) has this day found to have committed an offence and has been
placed under the care of (name)_________________________________(address)
__________________________________________________________ on executing a bond by
the said ______________________________________________and the Board is satisfied that it
is expedient to deal with the said juvenile by making an order placing him/her under supervision.
It is hereby ordered that the said juvenile be placed under the supervision of
____________________________________________ probation officer/case worker, for a
period of __________________________________________ subject to the following
conditions.
1. that the juvenile along with the copies of the order and the bond executed by the said
__________________________________________________ shall be produced before the
probation officer/caseworker named therein
___________________________________________.
2. that the juvenile shall be submitted to the supervision of the aforesaid probation officer/ case
worker.
3. that the juvenile shall reside at _____________________ for a period of ____________.
4. that the juvenile shall not be allowed to quit the district jurisdiction of _________without the
permission of the probation officer/case worker.
5. that the juvenile shall not be allowed to associate with bad characters.
6. that the juvenile shall live honestly and peacefully; and will go to school regularly/
endeavour to earn an honest livelihood.
7. that the juvenile shall attend the attendance centre regularly.
8. that the person under whose care the juvenile is placed shall arrange for the proper care,
education and welfare of the juvenile.
9. that the preventive measures will be taken by the person under whose care the juvenile is
placed to see that the juvenile does not commit any offence punishable by any law in India.
10. that the juvenile shall be prevented from taking narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or
any other intoxicants.
11. That the directions given be the probation officer/case worker from time to time, for the due
observance of the conditions mentioned above, shall be carried out.
Dated this______________________day of______________________ 20___.
(signature)
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board
• Additional, conditions, if any may be inserted by the Juvenile Justice Board
74

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM-II
[Rule 13(1)(d)]
Order of detention under Sub-Section ________ of Section ________, Sub-Section_____ of
Section ____________ and Sub-Section ___________ of Section______________.
To
The Officer in charge
__________________
__________________
Whereas on the ____________________ day of ____________________20____,
___________________ (name of the juvenile), son/ daughter of __________________,
aged_____, residing at ____________________________ being found in Profile No.
_________________________ to be juvenile in conflict with law/ section _________________
is order by me ___________________ Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board under
section________________________ of Juvenile Justice Act, 2000 to be kept in the Observation
Home/ Special Home/ ______________________________________________ for a period of
________________.
This is to authorize and require you to receive the said juvenile; into your charge, and to keep
him/her in the Observation Home/ Special Home/ ___________________________ for the
aforesaid order to be carried into execution according to law.
Given under my hand and the seal of Juvenile Justice Board
This __________________________ day of _________________________ 20.
(signature)
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board
Encl:
Copy of the judgment, if any, or orders, particulars of home and case history and individual care
plan, if any:
Strike off which is not required.
75

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM-III
ORDER OF SOCIAL INVESTIGATION/INQUIRY
[Rule 13(1)(e) and (5)]
To
Probation Officer/ Case Worker/Person in-charge of Voluntary Organization/ Case Worker
Whereas a report/complaint under section __________________ of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of children) Act, 2000 has been received from________
_____________________ in respect of_____________________________(name of the
juvenile), son/daughter of _________________________________________approximate age
_____ residing at________________________________________________________, who has
been produced before the Board.
You are hereby directed to enquire into the social antecedents, family background and
circumstances of the alleged offence by the said juvenile and submit your social investigation
report on or before _______________or within such time allowed to you by the Board.
You are also hereby directed to consult an expert in child psychology, psychiatric treatment or
counselling for their expert opinion if necessary and submit such report along with your Social
Investigation Report.
Dated this _______________________________day of __________________20______.
(Signature)
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board
76

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM IV
[Rules 13(5) and 87(1)(a) and (2)]
SOCIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT
Sl. No.________________
Submitted to the Juvenile Justice Board__________________________________(address).
Probation Department/Concerned State Government Authority/Voluntary
Organisation_________________________________________________________(Signature
and Stamp)
Profile No.
Under section:
Title of Profile:
Police Station:
Nature of offence charge:
____________________________________________________________________
Name Religion
Father’s Name Caste
Permanent Address Year of birth
Last address before apprehension Age
________________________________________________Sex__________________
Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any
FAMILY
Members Name Age Health Education Occupation Monthly Disabilities Any
of family earnings other
eg.
social
habits
Father
Step
Father
Mother
77

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Step
mother
Siblings
Any
other
legal
guardian/
relative
If married, relevant particulars
________________________________________________________________________
Other near relatives or agencies
Interested________________________________________________________________
Attitude towards religion normal
And ethical code of the home etc._____________________________________________
Social and economic status__________________________________________________
Delinquency record of members
of family________________________________________________________________
Present living conditions____________________________________________________
Relationship between parents/
Parents and children especially
With the juvenile under investigation____________________________________________
Other factors of importance if any____________________________________________
JUVENILES HISTORY
Mental condition
(Present and past)___________________________________________________________
Physical condition
(Present and past)___________________________________________________________
Habits, interests
(moral, recreational etc.)___________________________________________________
Outstanding characteristics and
personality traits__________________________________________________________
78

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Companions and their influence______________________________________________
Truancy from home, if any
________________________________________________________________________
School (attitude towards school,
teachers, class mates and vice-versa)
Work record (jobs held, reasons for leaving,
vocational interests, attitude towards job or employers)___________________________
Neighbourhood and neighbours report_________________________________________
Parent’s attitude towards discipline
in the home and child’s reaction_____________________________________________
Any other remarks
RESULT OF INQUIRY
Emotional factors
Physical condition
Intelligence
Social and economic factors
Religious factors
Suggested causes of the problems
Analysis of the case including reasons for delinquency
Opinion of experts consulted
Recommendation regarding treatment and its Plan by Probation Officer
Signature of the Probation Officer/Case Worker
79

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM – V
[Rules 15(5) and 79(2)]
UNDERTAKING/ BOND TO BE EXECUTED BY A PARENT/ GUARDIAN/ RELATIVE
/FIT PERSON IN WHOSE CARE A JUVENILE IS PLACED
Whereas I ___________________________ being the parent, guardian, relative or fit person
under whose care _____________________________________(name of the juvenile) has been
ordered to be placed by the Juvenile Justice Board __________________________, have been
directed by the said Board to execute an undertaking/ bond with surety in the sum of
Rs.________/- (Rupees____________________________________________________) or
without surety. I hereby bind myself on the said ________________________________ being
placed under my care. I shall have the said ________________________ properly taken care of
and I do further bind myself to be responsible for the good behaviour of the said
__________________________________and to observe the following conditions for a period of
_________________ years w.e.f _________________.
1. that I shall not change my place of residence without giving previous intimation in writing to
the Juvenile Justice Board through the Probation Officer/Case Worker;
2. that I shall not remove the said juvenile from the limits of the jurisdiction of the Juvenile
Justice Board without previously obtaining the written permission of the Board;
3. that I shall send the said juvenile daily to school/to such vocation as is approved by the Board
unless prevented from so doing by circumstances beyond control;
4. that I shall send the said juvenile to an Attendance Centre regularly unless prevented from
doing so by circumstances beyond my control;
5. that I shall report immediately to the Board whenever so required by it;
6. that I shall produce the said juvenile in my care before the Board, if he/she does not follow
the orders of Board or his/her behaviour is beyond control;
7. that I shall render all necessary assistance to the Probation Officer /Case Worker to enable
him to carry out the duties of supervision;
8. in the event of my making default herein, I undertake to produce myself before the Board for
appropriate action or bind myself, as the case may be, to forfeit to Government the sum of
Rs.__________ (Rupees_______________________________________).
Dated this __________________________day of _____________________20.
Signature of person executing the Undertaking/Bond.
(Signed before me)
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board
Additional conditions, if any, by the Juvenile Justice Board may be entered numbering them
properly;
80

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
(Where a bond with sureties is to executed add)
I/We _________________________________________of ___________________________
(place of residence with full particulars) hereby declare myself/ourselves as surety/sureties for
the aforesaid _____________ (name of the person executing the undertaking/bond) to adhere to
the terms and conditions of this undertaking/bond. In case of ________________ (name of the
person executing the bond) making fault therein, I/We hereby bind myself/ourselves jointly or
severally to forfeit to government the sum of Rs._______________/-
(Rupees_______________________________________________________) dated this the
_____ day of _____________20 ______ in the presence of
______________________________________________________.
Signature of Surety(ties)
(Signed before me)
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board
81

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM VI
[Rules 15(6) and 79(2)]
PERSONAL BOND BY JUVENILE/CHILD
Personal Bond to be signed by juvenile/child who has been ordered under Clause
______________of Sub-Section _________________ of Section ___________________ of the
Act.
Whereas, I _________________________________ inhabitant of _______________ (give full
particulars such as house number, road, village/town, tehsil, district, state) _________________
have been ordered to be sent back/restored to my native place by the Juvenile Justice
Board/Child Welfare Committee ________________________ under section ____________ of
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 on my entering into a personal
bond under sub-rule _____ of rule ____ and sub-rule ____ of rule ____ of these Rules to observe
the conditions mentioned herein below. Now, therefore, I do solemnly promise to abide by these
conditions during the period__________________.
I hereby bind myself as follows:
1. That during the period________ I shall not ordinarily leave the village/town/district to
which I am sent and shall not ordinarily return to_________________ or go anywhere
else beyond the said district without the prior permission of the Board/Committee;
2. That during the said period I shall attend school/ vocational training in the village/town or
in the said district to which I am sent;
3. That in case of my attending school/ vocational training at any other place in the said
district I shall keep the Board/Committee informed of my ordinary place of residence.
I hereby acknowledge that I am aware of the above conditions which have been read
over/explained to me and that I accept the same.
(Signature or thumb impression of the juvenile/child)
Certified that the conditions specified in the above order have been read over/explained to (Name
of juvenile/child)_________________________and that he/she has accepted them as the
conditions upon which his/her period of detention/ placement in safe custody may be revoked.
Certified accordingly that the said juvenile/child has been released/relived on
the________________________.
Signature and Designation of the certifying authority
i.e. Officer-in-charge of the institution
82

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM VII
[Rule 17(10)]
DISCHARGE ORDER
I _______________________ name and designation of the discharging
authority_________________________________________________ State Government/ Union
Territory Administration, do by this order permit__________________________ son/ daughter
of _______________________residence___________________________________
Profile Number__________________ who was ordered to be detained/placed in a observation
home/special home/after care home by the Juvenile Justice Board
____________________________under section_________________ of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act 2000, for a term of __________________ on the
____________day of _____________20__________ and who is now in the ______________
home, at ________________________to be discharged from the said_______________ home
and supervision and the authority of ________________________________ during the
remaining period of stay.
This order is granted subject to the conditions hereon, upon the breach of any of which it shall be
liable to be revoked.
Dated Signature and Designation of
Releasing Authority
Place:
Conditions:
1. The discharged person shall proceed to ________________________________ and live
under the supervision and authority of ________________________ until the expiry of
the period of his/her detention unless the remission is sooner cancelled.
2. He/She shall not, without the consent of the __________________ remove
himself/herself from that place or any other place, which may be named by the said
_____________________________.
3. He/she shall obey such instruction as he/she may receive from the said
______________________ with regard to punctual and regular attendance at
school/vocation or otherwise.
4. He/She shall attend the Attendance Centre located at ____________________ regularly.
5. He/She shall abstain from committing any offense and shall lead a sober and industrious
life to the satisfaction of _________________________.
6. In the even of his/her committing a breach of any of the above conditions the remission
of the period of detention hereby granted shall be liable to be cancelled and on such
83

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
cancellation he/she shall be dealt with under sub section (3) of section 59 of the Juvenile
Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act 2000.
I hereby acknowledge that I am aware of the above conditions which have been read
over/explained to me and that I accept the same.
(Signature or mark of the released juvenile)
Certified that the conditions specified in the above order have been read over/explained to (Name
of juvenile/child)_________________________and that he/she has accepted them as the
conditions upon which his/her period of detention may be revoked.
Certified accordingly that the said juvenile/child has been discharged on
the________________________.
Signature and Designation of the certifying authority
i.e. Officer-in-charge of the institution
84

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM VIII
[Rule 27(17)]
SUPERVISION ORDER
When the Child is placed under the case of a parent guardian or other fit person
Case No.___________________________ of __________________________ 20___
Whereas (name of the child) _____________________________ has this day been found to be
in need of care and protection, and has been placed under the care and supervision of (name)
_______________________________ (address) _________________________on executing a
bond by the said _______________________________ and the Committee is satisfied that it is
expedient to deal with the said child by making an order placing him/her under supervision.
It is hereby ordered that the said child be placed under the supervision of (name)
_______________________ (address) ____________________________________ for a period
of ________________________ subject to the following conditions that:
1. the child along with the copies of the order and the bond, if any, executed by the said
________________________________ shall be produced before the Committee as and
when required by the person executing the bond
2. the child shall be placed under the supervision of the aforesaid parent/guardian/ fit person
3. the child shall reside at ______________________ for a period of ____________
4. the child shall not be allowed to quit the district jurisdiction of _______________ with
the permission of the Committee.
5. the child shall go to school regularly/endeavour to earn an honest livelihood.
6. the person under whose care the child is placed shall arrange for the proper care,
education and welfare of the child.
7. the child shall not be allowed to associate with undesirable characters and shall be
prevented from coming in conflict with law.
8. the child shall be prevented from taking narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or any
other intoxicants.
9. the directions given by the Committee from time to time, for the due observance of the
conditions mentioned above, shall be carried out.
Dated this ___________________ day of _____________________ 20 _____________
(Signature)
Chairperson, Child Welfare Committee
• Additional conditions, if any may be interested by the Child Welfare Committee
85

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM IX
[Rules 27(17) and 79(2)]
UNDERTAKING BY THE PARENT OR ‘FIT PERSON’ TO WHOM
CHILD IS RESTORED
I ___________________________________________ resident of House no. _________ Street
_____________ Village/Town __________________ District ___________________ State
______________ do hereby declare that I am willing to take charge of (name of the child)
_____________________________________ Aged _______ under the orders of the Child
Welfare Committee______________________________ subject to the following terms and
conditions:
(i) If his/her conduct is unsatisfactory I shall at once inform the Committee.
(ii) I shall do my best for the welfare and education of the said child as long as he/ she
remains in my charge and shall make proper provision for his/her maintenance.
(iii) In the event of his/her illness, he/she shall have proper medical attention in the
nearest hospital.
(iv) I undertake to produce him/her before the competent authority as and when required.
Date this ………………day of ………………..
Signature
Signature and address of witness (es)
(Signed before me)
Chairperson, Child Welfare Committee
86

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM X
[Rule 27(18)]
ORDER OF SHORT TERM PLACEMENT PENDING INQUIRY
Name of the child :
Sex :
Age :
Father’s Name :
Mother’s Name :
Address :
Date of receiving by Organization/Institution:
Produced by:
This is to authorize and direct you to receive the said child in your charge, and keep her/him in
the Shelter Home/Children’s home for care and protection under section 33 (1) of the J.J. Act,
2000.
Next Date:
(Signature)
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
87

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XI
[Rule 27(19)]
ORDER OF RESTORATION OF A CHILD TO AN INSTITUTION
To
The Officer-in-Charge
Whereas on the ____________________ day of ____________________20 ______ (name of
the child) ______________________________, son/daughter of _______________________
aged _____ residing at ________________________________________________________
being in care and protection under section 33(4) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act
2000 is ordered by the Child Welfare Committee _________________________, to be kept in
the Children’s Home/ Shelter Home
__________________________________________________ for a period of
________________.
This is to authorize and require you to receive the said child in your charge, and to kept him/her
in the Children’s Home/ Shelter Home ___________________________ for the aforesaid order
to be carried into execution according to law.
Given under my hand and the seal of Child Welfare Committee.
This __________________________ day of _________________________ 20.
(signature)
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
Encl:
Copy of the orders, particulars of home and previous record, case history and individual care
plan, whichever is applicable:
88

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM-XII
[Rule 28(1)]
ORDER FOR ENQUIRY
To
Child Welfare Officer/Person in-charge of Voluntary Organization/Social Worker/Case Worker
Whereas a report under section __________________ of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of children) Act, 2000 has been received from _____________________________ in
respect of (name of the child)_____________________________, aged (approximate)____,
son/daughter of _________________________________________ residing
at_________________________________________________________________, who has
been produced before the Committee under section________________ of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
You are hereby directed to enquire into the social and family background of the said child and
submit your inquiry report on or before _______________or within such time allowed to you by
the Committee.
You are also hereby directed to consult an expert in child psychology, psychiatric treatment or
counselling for their expert opinion if necessary and submit such report along with your Inquiry
Report.
You are hereby directed to enquire into the character and social antecedents of the said juvenile
and submit your social investigation report on or before __________________
___________________________________ or within such time allowed to you by the
Board/Committee.
Dated this _______________________________day of __________________20______.
(signature)
Chairperson/Member
Child Welfare Committee
SEAL
89

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XIII
[Rules 28(3); 33(3)(g)(ii); and (4)(f); and 87(1)(a) and (2)]
FORMAT FOR INQUIRY REPORT
Sl. No________________
Produced before the Child Welfare Committee_____________________________
(address).
Case No.
Concerned Government Department/ Voluntary Organisation
Category of child in need of care and protection:
____________________________________________________________________
Name Religion
Father’s Name Caste
Permanent Address Year of birth
Address of last residence Age
________________________________________________Sex__________________
Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any
FAMILY
Members Name Age Health Education Occupation Monthly Disabilities Any
of family earnings other
eg.
social
habits
Father
Step
Father
Mother
Step
mother
Siblings
Any
other
legal
guardian/
relative
90

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
If married, relevant particulars
________________________________________________________________________
Other near relatives or agencies
interested________________________________________________________________
Attitude towards religion, normal
and ethical code of the home etc._____________________________________________
Social and economic status__________________________________________________
Delinquency record of members
of family________________________________________________________________
Present living conditions____________________________________________________
Relationship between parent/
parents and children especially
with the said child ____________________________________________
Other factors of importance if any____________________________________________
CHILD’S HISTORY
Mental condition
(Present and past)___________________________________________________________
Physical condition
(Present and past)___________________________________________________________
Habits, interests
(moral, recreational etc.)___________________________________________________
Outstanding characteristics and
personality traits__________________________________________________________
Companions and their influence______________________________________________
Truancy from home, if any
________________________________________________________________________
School (attitude towards school,
91

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
teachers, class mates and vice-versa)
Work record (jobs held, reasons for leaving
vocational interests, attitude towards job or employers)___________________________
Neighbourhood and neighbours report_________________________________________
Parent attitude towards discipline
in the home and child’s reaction_____________________________________________
Any other remarks
RESULT OF INQUIRY
Emotional factors
Physical condition
Intelligence
Social and economic factors
Religious factors
Reasons for child’s need for care and protection
Opinion of experts consulted
Recommendation of Child Welfare Officer/Case Worker/Social Worker regarding psychological
support, rehabilitation and reintegration of the child and suggested plan
Signature of the Child Welfare Officer/Case Worker/Social Worker
92

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XIV
[Rule 33(3)(c)]
ORDER FOR DECLARING CHILD LEGALLY FREE FOR ADOPTION
1. In exercise of the powers vested in the Child Welfare Committee_________________
constituted under sub-section______ of section______ of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000 and sub-rule____ of rule____ of these rules,
minor_________________________ born on (date) ____________ placed in custody of
Specialised Adoption Agency (name & address) ____________________,
__________________________vide order ___________ dated _____________ of the
Chairperson, Child Welfare Committee __________________________________, has
been declared legally free for adoption on the basis of details furnished through:
a) Inquiry/home study conducted by Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker/ Case Worker
b) Document of surrender executed by the parent(s) and surrender deed signed in the
presence of the Committee under sub-rules __________ of rule _____ of these rules
c) Declaration submitted by the Specialised Adoption Agency under sub-rules_______
of rule ______ of these rules
2. _________________________________________ (name of the Specialised Adoption
Agency) shall fulfill all conditions specified in Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 and the rules relating thereto and furnish a copy of adoption
decree/guardianship order in respect of the minor as may be required by Committee and
the concerned Department of the State Government of ____________.
Date: Chairperson/Member
Place Child Welfare Committee
For completion by the Specialised Adoption Agency.
i. I have read and understood Chapters III and IV of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Act, 2000 and the rules thereunder and agree to abide/be bound by the same
while placing said minor in adoption.
ii. I further declare that the particulars stated in the declaration submitted by me on
____________________ true and correct. In case they are found to be false or incorrect,
the Committee has right to suspend this Release Order for (name of the minor)
____________________________ and ask for production of said minor before the
Committee.
Date:
Place:
Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker
93

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XV
[Rule 33(4)(c)]
DEED OF SURRENDER
I __________________________________ d/o or s/o___________________________ residing
at __________________________________________________________________
am not in a position due to social reasons/ due to being single/ ill/ disabled to take care of my
child (name, if any) ___________________________________ approximate age_____ years. I
am explained the consequences of surrendering my child by the Child Welfare Officer/Social
Worker (name) __________________________and the Child Welfare Committee
______________. In full knowledge of all these facts, I am surrendering my child before the
Committee today, dated _______________. Within two months from this stated date if I do not
revise my decision to take back my child and do not approach the said Committee for the same,
the Committee shall declare my child legally free for adoption and I shall have no further claim
on my child.
Signature of parent/guardian
Date
That I ___________________________________ Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker have
explained the procedure and the consequences of surrendering the child to the concerned
parent/guardian on (date) ______________.
Signature of Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker
Date
(Signed before me)
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
94

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XVI
[Rule 35(3)]
A. FOSTER CARER’S ASSESSMENT
1. Agency Details
Name of the Agency
Address
Telephone
Fax
E-mail
Name of the Social Worker
Tel
Date_____________________ (Form Completed)
2. Details of the Applicant
Surname
Full Name
Date of Birth
Religion
Language(s) spoken at Home
Occupation
(a) Nature of Work
(b) Hours of Work
Address
Telephone
3. Description of a preferred child
The type of child, the foster-carer would consider
(To be filled after a full discussion with the Foster-carer)
95

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Age Range Under 2 years 3-6 years 7-12 years 13-15 years 16-18 years
Sl. Type of Placement Duration
No.
(i) Pre adoption
(ii) Emergency
(iii) Short term
(iv) Assessment
(v) Long term
The Child an applicant can care for (Please Tick)
A child who is:
i. Neglected
ii. Orphaned
iii. With Physical impairment
iv. Mental impairment
v. Hearing impairment
vi. Speech impairment
vii. Special Education needs
viii. Learning difficulties
ix. Physical abuse
x. Sexual abuse
xi. Who does not relate easily
xii. Who needs control/may defy authority
xiii. Born of rape/incest
xiv. Who’s parent(s) suffering from disease
xv. Whose parent(s) is HIV positive
xvi. Whose parent(s) are AIDS patient
xvii. Whose parent(s) are alcoholic
xviii. Drug addicts
xix. Are in jail
xx. Relinquished
xxi. Belong to another caste
xxii. Are of different religion
96

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
4. Profile of the family
Brief Family Profile
Name Gender Approx. Age Occupation Education Relationship
with the
applicant
(Give details of personalities, family life, experiences etc. Also highlight specific qualities of the
family that can match with a child’s needs. The details should facilitate initial identification of a
potential match with a specific child.)
Accommodation (House)
(Details of type, size, own/rented space, amenities etc.)
Neighborhood
(Details of composition, amenities and facilities, public transport etc.)
5. Verification of applicant’s identity
Place of residence
Period of stay
Nationality
Marital status (date/length of marriage)
Has either of the applicant had a previous marriage? Details
If children from previous marriage? Details
Specify documents seen with date
6. Career History
(Details of education, employment, voluntary work, part time work, leisure activities)
7. Agency Inquiries:
97

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
Medical check
Police check
Employer
8. Personal references (from 2 persons)
This section to be completed after interviews with two references; information gathered through
these interviews should include:
(cid:131) Length of time known
(cid:131) Relationship to the applicant
(cid:131) Provide evidence on the applicants ability to perform the tasks involved in _________
(cid:131) Caring for children
(cid:131) Providing a safe and caring environment
(cid:131) Applicant as a neighbor
(cid:131) Interests, talents, personality
Assessment of the social worker for these references
B. HOME STUDY REPORT
A Home Study Report of the foster carer(s) being a crucial document being prepared by the
social worker of the Specialised Adoption Agency based on the information collected by the
format given above should broadly include the following information:
• Social status and family background
• Description of the home
• Standard of living as it appears in the home
• Current relations amongst the members in the home
• Status of development of the children already in the home
• Employment and economic status
• Health details
• Details of facilities of education, medical, vocational trainings available in the neighborhood
• Reasons for wanting a child in foster care
• Attitudes of the grandparents and other relatives
• Anticipated plans for the foster child
• Legal status of the foster carer(s)
• Willingness to undergo training.
C. DETAILS OF APPLICANT(S)
1. Background:
Family structure with details of parents and siblings, significant details of other family members,
childhood experiences, etc.
98

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
2. Relationships:
If couple – Length of married life, what qualities does each applicant bring to the partnership,
what makes the relationship positive for each other? Within the relationship how do applicants
cope with problems/stress/anger? How do applicants support each other? What is each
applicant’s assessment of how the foster placement will affect his or her relationship?
3. Decision making:
How is decision – making exercised in this relationship and how does each of the applicants
view this? Is there wider extended family involvement in the couple’s decision-making process?
If so, how will this affect the child to be placed?
What are the strengths and vulnerabilities of this partnership?
(cid:131) Children
(cid:131) Children and their parents’ relationships
(cid:131) Children’s attitude and readiness for a foster placement sibling. Describe each child and
their temperament, any special talent and need, how children have been involved in
preparation.
4. Applicants support networks:
Give a general picture of support systems currently used by the applicants including extended
family, friends, neighbors, religious activities, community groups etc. include details of the
location etc.
5. Other significant members of the family:
Living in the house or not. Their relationship to the applicants, how much time they spent within
the home, their attitude to the proposed placement? How important is their acceptance of
placement to the applicant.
6. Description of the family life style:
Outline what family considers important e.g. how important are religious & cultural practices.
How is affection show in the family? How do the members spend their time? What expectations
family members have with regard to personal space? What value is placed on education/hobbies
and leisure activities that the whole family undertakes?
7. Parenting capacities:
Experience of the applicants of caring and working with children. Describe their adjustment to
parenthood. What is their understanding of how children develop?
Using their own childhood experiences what patterns of parenting would the repeat and what
would they change? What is their understanding of their own parenting strengths/potentials and
about their parenting skills to meet the needs of individual child. To what extent they would
expect other family members to be involved in parenting of their children/placed children.
How will they ensure that a child will be safe from physical sexual abuse in their family and
within wider support networks?
99

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
8. Managing Unacceptable Behaviour:
What are rules in the household? How do the applicants show approval/disapproval? What are
discipline measures they use? Their attitude towards punishment?
What do they anticipate would be the issues and difficulties and themselves for their own
children and for their support network? What do they anticipate would be the issues and
difficulties for the child? Which changes do they anticipate would need in their lifestyle?
Social workers assessment:
It should provide an analysis of all the information collected through the format and its
significance with regard to the capacity of the applicant to carryout fostering task:
(What skills do the applicants have in relating to and working with children? How well will the
applicant work with the agency, with biological parents? What are the strengths and resources of
the applicants and which are the areas where they may experience difficulty? Also the point of
disagreement between the social worker and the applicants should be recorded here)
Recommendations of the Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker
(Signature)
100

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XVII
[Rule 34(1)]
ORDER OF FOSTER CARE PLACEMENT
The child (name and address) _________________________________________________ approximate
age______ d/o or s/o Mr._______________________________ and Mrs.
_____________________________or Ms._________________________________________
is in need of care and protection of a family. Mr._____________________________ and
Mrs._________________________________ or Ms._____________________________ resident
of (complete address and contact numbers) ________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________is/ are
declared fit person/persons for foster-care placement of the child based on the home study report of the
Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker Ms./ Mr.__________________________________ of the
organization (address) _____________________________________________________.
.
The child (name) _____________________________________ is placed in foster care for a
period of __________________ (days/ months), under the supervision of the aforesaid Child
Welfare Officer/Social Worker (name and contact) ________________________________.
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
101

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XVIII
[Rule 37(5)]
ORDER OF SPONSORSHIP PLACEMENT
The juvenile/child (name and address) ____________________________________________
approximate age______ d/o or s/o Mr._______________________________ and Mrs.
_____________________________or Ms._________________________________________
has been identified by the State/ District Child Protection Unit as a juvenile/child at risk needing urgent
care and protection. On the basis of the Inquiry Report submitted by the State/District Child Protection
Unit/ Child Welfare Officer/ Social Worker it is established that the said juvenile/child needs sponsorship
support for education/ health/ nutrition/ other developmental needs
_______________________________________ (please specify). The State/District Child Protection Unit
is hereby directed to release Rs.______ per month/ Rs.________ as one time sponsorship support to the
said juvenile/ child for a period of _________ (days/month) and carryout necessary follow up.
.
The State/District Child Protection Unit is also directed to clearly lay down the terms and
conditions for sponsorship support and follow up.
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board/
Chairperson/Member, Child Welfare Committee
Copy to: State/District Child Protection Unit or concerned Department of the State
Government
102

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XIX
[Rule 38(3)]
ORDER OF AFTER CARE PLACEMENT
The juvenile/child (name) _________________________________________________ d/o or
s/o __________________________________________ has/ will be completing 18 years of age
on (date) _____________. She/ he is still in need of care and protection for the purpose of
rehabilitation and reintegration. She/he is placed in (name of
organization)________________________________ for providing aftercare. The In-charge of
the Organization is directed to admit the child and provide all possible opportunities for her/ his
rehabilitation and reintegration in its truest sense. The person shall be provided all these
opportunities maximum till the age of 21 years only or till reintegration in the society, whichever
is earlier. The In-charge will send half yearly report on the status of the child/youth to the Child
Welfare Committee.
The State/District Child Protection Unit is hereby directed to arrange for aftercare for the said
juvenile/child for a period of _________ (days/month) and carryout necessary follow up. The
State/District Child Protection Unit is also directed to clearly lay down the terms and conditions for
aftercare programme and carryout necessary follow up.
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board/
Chairperson/Member, Child Welfare Committee
Copy to: State/District Child Protection Unit or concerned Department of the State
Government
103

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XX
[Rule 50(9) and 54(1)(t)]
CASE HISTORY FORM FOR CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
Case/Profile No.______________
Date & Time_________________ Affix a
latest
photograph
here
A. PERSONAL DATA
1 Name
2 Male / Female (tick the appropriate category)
3 a) age at the time of admission
b) present age:
4 Category:
- Separated from family
- Abandoned/deserted
- Victim of exploitation and violence (give detail)
- Run-away
- Any other
5 Religion Hindu (OC/BC/SC/ST)
Muslim/Christian/Other (pl. specify)
6 Location of Residence Urban/Sub-urban/Rural/Slum/
Industrial/Other (Pl. specify)
7 Native District & State:
8 Description of the Housing:
i) Concrete building Tiled
House/Hut/On the street/Others
(please Specify)
ii) Three bed room/two-bed
room/one-bed room/no separate
104

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
bed room
iii) Owned/rental
9. By whom the juvenile was brought before
the Child Welfare Committee:
i) Police-Local Police/Special Juvenile
Police Unit/Railway Police/ Women Police
ii) Probation Officers
iii) Social Welfare Organization
iv) Social Worker
v) Parent(s)/Guardian (s) (please
Specify the relationship)
vi) Child himself/herself
10. Reasons for leaving the family
i) Abuse by parent(s)/guardian(s)/step parents(s)
ii) In search of employment
iii) Peer group influence
iv) Incapacitation of parents
v) Criminal behaviour of parents
vi) Separation of Parents
vii) Demise of parents
viii) Poverty
ix) Others (please specify)
11. Types of abuse met by the child
i) Verbal abuse – parents/siblings/
employers/others (pl. specify)
ii) Physical abuse
iii)Sexual abuse parents/siblings/
Employers/others (Pl. specify)
iv)Others – parents/siblings/
employers/others (pl. Specify)
12. Types of ill-treatment met by the child.
i) Denial of food – parents/siblings
employers/other (pl. specify)
ii) Beaten mercilessly – parents/
Siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
iii) Causing injury – parents/
siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
iv) Other (pl. specify) – parents/
siblings/ employers/others (pl. specify)
13. Exploitation faced by the child
105

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
i) Extracted work without payment
ii) Little (low) wages with longer duration of work
iii) Others (pl. specify)
14. Health status of the child before admission.
i) Respiratory disorders - present / not known / absent
ii) Hearing impairment - present / not known / absent
iii) Eye diseases - present / not known / absent
iv) Dental disease - present / not known / absent
v) Cardiac diseases - present / not known / absent
vi) Skin disease - present / not known / absent
vii) Sexually transmitted diseases - present / not known / absent
viii)Neurological disorders - present / not known / absent
ix) Mental handicap - present / not known / absent
x) Physical handicap - present / not known / absent
xi) Others (pl. specify) - present / not known / absent
15. With whom the child was staying prior to admission
i) Parent(s) – Mother / Father / Both
ii) Guardian(s) – Relationship
iii) Friends
iv) On the street
v) Night shelter
vi) Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
vii) Other (pl. specify)
16. Visit of the parents to meet the child
i) Prior to institutionalization –
Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / Never
ii) After institutionalization -
Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / Never
17. Visit of the child to his family
i) Prior to institutionalization –
Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During summer holidays /
Whenever fallen sick / Never
ii) After institutionalization –
Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During summer holidays /
Whenever fallen sick / Never
18. Correspondence with parents -
i) Prior to institutionalization –
Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During summer holidays /
Whenever fallen sick / Never
106

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
ii) After institutionalization –
Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During summer holidays /
Whenever fallen sick / Never
B CHILDHOOD HISTORY (up to the age of 12 years)
19. Diet of mother during pregnancy:
i) Taken nutritious diet
ii) Ordinary diet
iii) Inadequate food intake
20. Health during pregnancy
i) Mother infected with contagious diseases
ii) Mother consumed/ used contraceptives
iv) Intake of antibiotics
v) No such details available
21. Birth details
i) Normal delivery/ prolonged delivery/ caesarian
ii) Under weight/ normal weight/ over weight
22. Details of immunization provided
23. Details of handicap
i) Hearing impairment By birth/ After accident/ diseases
ii) Speech impairment By birth/ After accident/ diseases
iii) Physical handicap By birth/ After accident/ diseases
iv) Mental handicap By birth/ After accident/ diseases
v) Others (please specify)
C. FAMILY DETAILS:
24. Household Composition:
S. No. Name & Age Sex Education Occupation Income
Relationship
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Health History of Mental illness Handicap Habit Socialization
8 9 10 11 12
107

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
25. Type of family:
Nuclear family / joint family/ broken family
26. Relationship among the family members:
i) Father & mother Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
ii) Father & child Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
iii) Mother & child Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
iv) Father & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
v) Mother & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
vi) Juvenile & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
27. History of crime committed by family members:
S. No. Relationship Nature of Arrest if any Period of Punishment
crime made confinement awarded
1. Father
2. Step father
3. Mother
4. Step mother
5. Brother
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
6. Sister
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
7. Child
8. Others
(uncle/
aunty/
grandparents)
28. Properties owned by the family:
i) Landed properties (pl. specify the area)
ii) Household articles- Cows/ Cattle/ Bull
iii) Vehicles- two wheeler/ three wheeler/ four
wheeler (lorry/ bus/ car/ tractor/ jeep)
iv) Others (please specify)
29. Marriage details of family members:
108

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
i) Parents Arranged/ Special Marriage/ Local Union
ii) Brothers Arranged/ Special Marriage/ Local Union
v) Sisters Arranged/ Special Marriage/ Local Union
30. Social activities of family members:
i) Participate in social and religious functions
ii) Participate in cultural activities
iii) Does not participate in social and religious functions
iv) Not known
31. Parental care towards juvenile before admission:
i) Over protection
ii) Affectionate
iii) Attentive
iv) Not affectionate
v) Not attentive
vi) Rejection
D. ADOLESCENCE HISTORY (Between 12 and 18 years)
32. Puberty
Early
Middle age
Late
33. Details of delinquent behaviour if any
i) Stealing
ii) Pick pocketing
iii) Arrack selling
iv) Drug pedaling
v) Petty offences
vi) Violent crime
vii) Rape
viii) None of the above
ix) Others (please specify)
34. Reason for delinquent behaviour
i) Parental neglect
ii) Parental overprotection
iii) Parents criminal behaviour
vi) Parents influence (negative)
vii) Peer group influence
viii) To buy drugs/alcohol
ix) Others (pl. specify)
35. Habits
109

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
A B
i) Smoking i) Watching TV/movies
ii) Alcohol consumption ii) Playing indoor/outdoor games
iii) Drug use (specify) iii) Reading books
iv) Gambling iv) Religious activities
v) Begging v) Drawing/painting/acting/singing
vi) Any other vi) Any other
E. EMPLOYMENT DETAILS
Employment details of the juveniles prior to entry into the Home:
S.No. Details of employment Duration Wages earned
i) Cooly
ii) Rag picking
iii) Mechanic
iv) Hotel work
v) Tea shop work
vi) Shoe polish
vii) Household works
viii) Others (pl specify)
36. Details of income utilization:
i) Sent to family to meet family need
ii) For dress materials
iii) For gambling
iv) For prostitution
v) For alcohol
vi) For drug
vii) For smoking
viii) Savings
37. Details of savings
i) With employers
ii) With friends
vi) Bank/Post Office
vii) Others (pl. specify)
38. Duration of working hours
i) Less than six hours
ii) Between six and eight hours
110

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
iii) More than eight hours
F. EDUCATIONAL DETAILS
39. The details of education of the juvenile prior to the admission to Children’s Home
i) Illiterate
ii) Studied up to V Standard
iii) Studied above V Std but below VIII Standard
iv) Studied above VIII Std but below X Standard
v) Studied above X Standard
40. The reason for leaving the School
i) Failure in the class last studied
ii) Lack of interest in the school activities
iii) Indifferent attitude of the teachers
iv) Peer group influence
v) To earn and support the family
vi) Sudden demise of parents
vii) Rigid school atmosphere
viii) Absenteeism followed by running away from school
ix) Others (pl. specify)
41. The details of the school in which studied last:
i) Corporation/Municipal/Panchayat Union
ii) Government/SC Welfare School/BC Welfare School
iv) Private management
v) Convents
42. Medium instruction:
Hindi/English/Urdu/Tamil/Malayalam/Kannada/ Telugu
Other language (please specify)
43. After admission to Children’s Home, the educationl attainment from the date of
admission till date;
No. of years Class studied Promoted /detained
44. Vocational training undergone form the date of admission into Children’s Home till date.
No. of years Name of Vocational Trade Proficiency Attained
45. Extra curricular activities developed form the date of admission into the Children’s Home
till date
i) Scout
111

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
ii) Sports (please specify)
iii) Athletics (please specify)
iv) Drawing
v) Painting
vi) Others (pl. specify)
G. MEDICAL HISTORY
46. Height and weight at the time of admission:
47. Physical condition:
48. Medical history of child (gist):
49. Medical history of parent/guardian (gist):
50. Present health status of the child:
Sl. Annual Observation 1st Quarter 2nd Quarter 3rd Quarter 4th Quarter
No.
1. Date of review
2. Height
3. Weight
4. Nutritious diet given
5. Stress disease
6. Dental
7. ENT- Tonsils
8. External eye
problem: vision
Left
Right
51. Height and Weight Chart:
Date, Month & Year Height Admissible weight Actual weight
112

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
H. SOCIAL HISTORY
52. Details of friendship prior to admission into Children’s Home:
i. Co-workers
ii. School/Classmate
iii. Neighbours
iv. Others (pl. specify)
53. Majority of the friends are
i. Educated
ii. Illiterate
iii. The same age group
iv. Older in age
v. Younger in age
vi. Same sex
vii. Opposite sex
54. Details of membership in group (please specify details)
i. Associated with cine fans association
ii. Association with religious group
iii. Associated with arts and sports club
iv. Associated with gangs
v. Associated with voluntary social service league
vi. Others (please specify)
55. The position of the child in the groups/league
i. Leader
ii. Second level leader
iii. Middle level functionary
iv. Ordinary member
56. Purpose of taking membership in the group:
i. For social service activities
ii. For leisure time spending
iii. For pleasure seeking activities
113

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
iv. For deviant activities
v. Others (please specify)
57. Attitude of the group / league
i. Respect the social norms and follow the rules
ii. Interested in violating the norms
iii. Impulsive in violating the rules
58. The location/meeting point of the groups
i. Usually at fixed place
ii. Places are changed frequently
iii. No specific places
iv. Meeting point is fixed conveniently
59. The reaction of the society when the child first came out of the family
i. Supportive
ii. Rejection
iii. Abuse
iv. Ill-treatment
v. Exploitation
60. The reaction of the police towards children
i. Passionate
ii. Cruel
iii. Abuse
iv. Exploitation
v. Ill-treatment
61. The response of the general public towards the child
HISTORY OF THE CHILD (GIST)
i. Education
ii. Health
iii. Vocational training
iv. Extra curricular activities
v. Others
Suggestion of Child Welfare Officer/ Probation Officer after orientation to juvenile/child and the
response towards orientation.
Follow up by Child Welfare Officer/ Probation Officer/ Case Worker/ Social Worker
Quarterly Review of Case History by Management Committee
SUPERINTENDENT/
WELFARE OFFICER/PROBATION OFFICER
114

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XXI
[Rules 50(12)(a), 54(1)(o) and 87(1)(k)]
INDIVIDUAL CARE PLAN
Individual care plan for each child shall be prepared following the principle of the best
interest of the child. In preparing individual care plan the care options in the following order
of preferences shall be considered:
(i) Preserving the biological family
(ii) Kinship Care
(iii) In-country adoption
(iv) Foster Care
(v) Inter-country Adoption
(vi) Institutional Care
Case/Profile No. of 20____(year) of the Board/Committee
Admission No.
Date of Admission:
A. PERSONAL DETAILS
1. Name of the Child:
2. Age:
3. Sex: Male/Female
4. Father’s/Mother’s name:
5. Nationality:
6. Religion/caste:
7. Educational Attainment:
8. Summary of Case History:
• Health needs
• Emotional and psychological support needed
• Educational and Training needs
• Leisure, creativity and play
115

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
• Attachments and Relationships
• Religious beliefs
• Protection from all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment
• Social mainstreaming
• Follow-up post release/restoration
B. FORTNIGHTLY PROGRESS REPORT OF PROBATIONER
Part One
1. Name of the Probation Officer/Case Worker
2. For the month of
3. Registration No.
4. Competent Authority
5. Profile No.
6. Name of the Child
7. Date of Supervision Order
8. Address of the Child
9. Period of Supervision
Part Two
Places of interview Dates
…………………. ………………
…………………. ………………
………………… ………………
1.Where the child is residing?
2.Progress made in any educational/training course.
3.What work he/she is doing and his/her monthly average earning, if employed.
4.Savings kept in the Post Office.
5.Savings Bank Account in his/her name.
6.Remarks on his/her general conduct and progress.
7.Whether property cared for?
Part Three
1. Any proceedings before the competent authority of or
a)Variation of conditions of bond
b)Change of residence
c)Other matters
2. Period of supervision completed on………………………………………
116

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
3. Result of supervision with remarks (if any)
4. Name and Addresses of the parent or guardian or fit person under whose care the juvenile is
to live after the supervision is over.
Date of report______________Signature of the Probation Officer/Case Worker________
C. PRE-RELEASE REPORT
Tick whichever is applicable
Final Release Transfer
1. Details of place of transfer and concerned authority responsible in the place of
transfer/release
2. Details placement of the juvenile/child in different institutions
3. Training undergone and skills acquired
4. Final progress report of the officer-in-charge/probation officer/child welfare officer/case
worker/social worker (to be attached)
5. Date of release/transfer
6. Date of repatriation
7. Requisition for escort if required
8. Identification of escort
9. Recommended rehabilitation plan including possible placements
10. Sponsorship requirement and report, if applicable
11. Identification of Probation Officer/Case worker/social worker/non-governmental
organisation for post-release follow-up
12. Memorandum of Understanding with non-governmental organisation identified for post-
release follow-up
13. Identification of sponsorship agency/individual sponsor for the child post-release, if any
14. Memorandum of Understanding between the sponsoring agency and individual sponsor
15. Details of Savings Account of the child, if any
16. Details of child’s earnings and belongings if any
17. Details of awards/rewards due to the child if any
18. Opinion of the child
19. Any other information
Note: Pre-release report shall be prepared 6 months prior to the date of release/transfer of
juvenile/child and shall take into account the recommendations of the last review report and all
other relevant information.
117

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
D. POST-RELEASE REPORT
1. Status of Bank Account : Closed / Transferred
2. Earnings and belongings of the child : handed over to the child or his/her
parents/guardians – Yes/No
3. First interaction report of the probation officer/child welfare officer/case
worker/social worker/non-governmental organisation identified for follow-up with
the child post-release
4. Placement of the juvenile/child if any
5. Family’s behaviour towards the child
6. Social milieu of the child, particularly attitude of neighbours/community
7. How is the child using the skills acquired?
8. Whether the child has been admitted to a chool or vocation? Give date and name of
the school/institute/any other agency
9. Report of second and third follow-up interaction with the child after two months and
six months respectively
118

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-chidlren-rules-2007.pdf ---
FORM XXII
[Rule 65(2)]
ESCORT ORDER
Case No……………. In the matter of Boy/Girl Child
……………………………….
Aged about…………year taken
Charged for sole custody under
Section 33(3) of the Juvenile
Justice Act 2000
The Parents of the boy/girl child are reported to be residing at:
He/She therefore be sent under supervision of a proper police/ non-governmental organisation
escort to the___________________________________________________________.
For tracing and for handing over to the parents or close relatives of the said Boy Child/Girl Child
residing at the aforesaid address or at other Place which may be shown by the Child, if no such
parents or relative are traced or if traced but they are unwilling to take charge of the boy/girl be
kept in the custody of the Superintendent……………………………………..Children’s Home
and the said Boy/Girl child be produced before the concerned Child Welfare Committee for
further orders.
Orders
Pending Escort, the said Boy/Girl Child shall remain in Children’s Home, residing at present.at--
------------------------------------------------------------------------------. The State/District Child
Protection Unit, or Police Department or non-governmental organisation/ Childline shall
positively make immediate arrangement not less than 15 days from the date of receipt of this
order by him and send the said Boy Child/Girl Child at his/her aforesaid place of residence.
Dated this…………………..day of……………………..200
Chairperson/Member
Child Welfare Committee
CC to:
1.The Superintendent, Children Home,.
2.The State/District Child Protection Unit or non-governmental organisation or Childline
Ref.: 1. Order of admission of minor……………born on………..Profile No……………
119

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
~ ~ ~ ~04/0007!200~
REGISTERED NO.DL--(~O4/000712003-06
. ,
~h~ (6C1~etteof~.~ia
mntm1JT
EXTRA 0RDINARY
'WI ll- ~1
PARTII-Section 1
~~~
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
~o39] ~~, ~~, 31'mf23,2006/ ~ 1,1928
No.39] NEWDELHI,WEDNESDAYA,UGUST23,2006/ BHADRA1,1928
~ 'WI-if1'R 1p'O~ ~ \1ffiit t ~ ~ ~ 0lWT~ <t~ -ifWI \ilnrt I
Separate paging isgivento thisPart inorder that it maybe filed as aseparate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAWAND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the23rdAugust, 2006/Bhadra 1,1928 (Saka)
The following Act of Parlian;tent received the assent of the President on the
22nd August, 2006, and ishereby published forgeneral information:-
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CAREAND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT ACT, 2006
(No, 33 OF2006)
[22ndAugust, 2006,]
AnAct toamend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection ofChildreri) Act, 2000.
BEit enacted by Parliamentinthe Fifty-seventhYearof the Republic of Indiaas
follows:-
1. ThisActmaybe calledthe JuvenileJustice (Care and Protectionof Children) Shorttitle.
Amen1mentAct,2006,
56of2000.
2. Inthe JuvenileJustice(CareandProtectionof Children)Act,2000 (hereinafter Amendment
retierredtoasthepn . ncl , palAct), I ' nthe1ongti ' tIe,tiorthewordS' " throug h varI . OUS , mst ' ltutl ' Ons of long title
.
established under this enactment", the words "and for matters connected therewith or
incidentalthereto"shallbe substituted,
Amendment
3. Insection1oftheprincipalAct,-
ofsection1.
(i) inthe marginalheading,for the words "and commencement",the words
",commencementandapplication"shallbesubstituted;
(ii)aftersub-section(3),thefollowingsub-sectionshallbeinserted,namely:-
"(4)Notwithstandinganythingcontainedin anyotherlawfor the time
being in force,the provisionsof thisAct shall applyto all cases involving
detention,prosecution, penaltyor sentence of imprisonmentofjuveniles in
conflictwithlawundersuchotherlaw.",

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
2 THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PART11-
Amendment
4. Insection 2ofthe principal Act,-
of section 2.
(l) ailer clause (a), the following clause shall beinserted, namely:-
'(aa) "adoption" means the process through which the adopted child is
permanently separated ITomhi~biological parents and become the legitimate
child of his adoptive parents with allthe rights, privileges and responsibilities
that are attached to the relationship;';
(ii)inclause (d),-
(I)aftersub-clause (i),thefollowing sub-clause shallbeinserted,namely:-
"(ia)who,isfoundbegging, orwhoiseitherastreetchildoraworking
child,";
(II)insub-clause(v),aftertheword 'abandoned', thewords'or surrendered'
shall be inserted;
(ifi) in clause (h), for the words "competent authority", the words "'State
Government onthe recommendation ofthe competent authority" shall be substituted;
(iv) for clause (I), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
'(I) "juvenile in conflict with law" means ajuvenile who is alleged to
have committed anoffence and hasnot completed eighteenth year of age as on
the date of commission of such offence;';
(v) clause (m) shall be omitted.
Omission of 5. Throughout theprincipal Act,thewords "local authority", "or localauthority" and
certain "or the local authority", wherever they occur, shall be omitted.
expressions.
Amendment. 6.Insection 4ofthe principal Act, insub-section (1), forthewords "by notification in
of section 4.
theOfficial Gazette, constitutefora districtoragroup ofdistricts specified inthenotification",
thewords "within aperiod ofoneyear ITomthedateofcommencement oftheJuvenile Justice
(Care andProtection ofChildren)AmendmentAct,2006,bynotification intheOfficialGazette,
constitute for every district" shall be substituted.
Amendment 7.Insection6oftheprincipal Act,insub-section (J),thewords "or agroup ofdistricts"
of section 6. shall be omitted.
Insertion of 8. After section 7 of the principalAct, the following section shall be inserted,
newsection
namely:-
7A.
Procedure to "7A. (J) Whenever aclaim ofjuvenility israised before anycourt oracourt isof
be followed
the opinion that an accused person was ajuvenile onthe date of commission of the
when claim of
offence; the court shall make an inquiry,take such evidence asmay be necessary (but
juvenility is
raised before not anaffidavit) so asto determine the age of such person, and shall record afinding
any court. whether theperson isajuvenile orachild or not, stating his age asnearly as may be:
Provided that aclaim ofjuvenility mayberaised before anycourt and itshallbe
recognised at any stage, even after final disposal ofthe case, and such claim shall be
determined intermsofthe provisions contained inthisActandtherulesmadethereunder,
even ifthejuvenile hasceased tobe soonor before thedate ofcommencement ofthis
Act.
(2) Ifthe court finds aperson to be ajuvenile onthe date ofcommission ofthe
offence under sub-section (1), it shall forward thejuvenile to the Board for passing
appropriate order, and the sentence ifany,passed byacourt shall be deemed to have
noeffect.".
Amendment 9. Insection 10oftheprincipal Act,forsub-section (1),thefollowing sub-section shall
.
of section 10.
be substituted, namely:-
"(J)As soon asajuvenile inconflict with lawisapprehended bypolice, heshall
be placed under the charge ofthe specialjuvenile police unitor thedesignated police

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
SEC.1] THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 3
officer, who shall produce thejuvenile before the Board without any loss of time but
within aperiod oftwenty-four hours ofhisapprehension excluding thetime necessary
forthejourney, from theplace where thejuvenile was appreh~nded, tothe Board:
Provided that innocase,ajuvenile inconflict with lawshallbeplaced inapolice
lockup orlodged inajail.".
10.' In section 12of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words "with or Amendment
without surety", the words "or placed under the supervision of aProbation Officer or under of section 12.
the care of any fit institution or fit person" shall be inserted.
11.Section 14oftheprincipal Act shallbe renumberedas sub-section (1)thereof, and Amendment
of section 14. .
after sub-section (1)assorenumbered, thefollowing sub-section shallbe~serted, namely:-
:'(2)TheChiefJudicialMagistrateortheChiefMetropolitan Magistrateshallreview
the pendency of cases of the Board at every sixmonths, and shall direct the Board to
increasethefrequencyofitssittingsormaycausetheconstitution ofadditionalBoards.".
12. Insection 15ofthe principal Act, insub-section (1), for clause (g), the following Amendment
clause shall be substituted, namely:- of section IS.
"(g) makeanorder directing thejuvenile to besenttoaspecial home foraperiod
of three years:
Provided thattheBoard may,ifitissatisfied that having regard tothe nature of
the offence and the circumstances of the case, itis expedient so to do, forreasons to
be recorded, reduce the period of stayto such period as itthinks fit.".
13. Insection 16oftheprincipal Act,- Amendment
of section 16.
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "or life imprisonment", the words "or
imprisonment for any term which may extend to imprisonment for life" shall be
substituted;
(ii)insub-section (2), fortheproviso, thefollowing proviso shallbesubstituted,
namely:-
"Provided that the period of detention so ordered shall not exceed inanycase
the maximum period provided under section 15ofthisAct.".
14. Insection 20ofthe principal Act,the following proviso andExplanation shall be Amendment
inserted, namely::- . of section 20.
"Provided that the Board may, for any adequate and special reason to be
mentioned inthe order, review the case and pass appropriate order in the interest of
such juvenile.
E:Xplanation.- Inallpending cases including trial, revision, appeal oranyother
criminal proceedings in respect of ajuvenile tin conflict with law, in any court, the
determination ofjuvenility ofsuchajuvenile shallbe interms ofclause(l)ofsection 2,
even ifthe juvenile ceases to besoonorbefore the date ofcommencement ofthisAct
and the provisions ofthis Act shall apply as ifthe said provisions had been inforce,
forallpurposes'and atallmaterial times when thealleged offence was committed.".
15. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, Substitutionof
namely:- newsectionfor
section21.
"21. (1)No report in anynewspaper, magazine, news-sheet or visual media of Prohibition of
publication of
any inquiry regarding ajuvenile in conflict with law or a child in need of care and
name, etc., of
protection under this Act shall disclose the name, address or school or any other
juvenile in
particulars calculated to leadtothe identification ofthejuvenile orchild nor shall any conflict with
law or child in
picture ofany suchjuvenile or child be published:
need of care
and protection
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the authority holding the
involved in
inquiry maypermit suchdisclosure, ifin itsopinion suchdisclosure isinthe interest of any
thejuvenile orthe child. proceeding
... under the Act.

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
4 THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARTII-C. ~
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), shall be
liable to ap~nalty which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees.".
Amendment 16.Insection 29oftheprincipal Act, insub-section (1), forthewords "by notification
of section 29.
in Official Gazette, constitute for every district, or group of districts specified in the
notification", thewords "within aperiod ofoneyear fromthedate ofcommencement ofthe
Juvenile Justice (Care andProte<;tionofChildren) Amendment Act,2006, bynotification in
theOfficial Gazette, constitute forevery district" shall be substituted.
Amendment 17. Insection32oftheprincipalAct,-
of section 32.
(a) in,sub-section(1),-
(i) in clause (iv), the words "authorised by the State Government" shall
be omitted;
(it)thefollowingprovisoshallbe insertedatthe end,namely:-
"ProvidedthatthechildshallbeproducedbeforetheCommitteewithout
anylossoftimebutwithinaperiodoftwenty-fourhoursexcludingthe time
necessaryforthejourney.";
(b) insub-section (2), the words "to thepolice and" shall be omitted.
Amendment 18. Insection 33ofthe principal Act,-
of section 33.
(a) insub-section (1),thewords "or anypolice officer orspecialjuvenile police
unit or the designated police officer" shall be omitted;
(b)forsub-section (3),thefollowing sub-sections shallbe substituted, namely:-
"(3) The State Government shall review the pendency of cases of the
Committee at every six months, and shall direct the Committee to increase the
frequency of itssittings ormay causethe constitution ofadditional Committees.
(4) After the completion of the inquiry, if, the Committee is of the
opinion thatthe saidchild hasnofamilyor ostensible support or isincontinued
need of care and protection, it may allow the child to remain in the children's
home or shelter home till suitable rehabilitation is found for him or till he
attains the age of eighteen years.".
Am\:ndment
19. In section 34 of tfte principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-
of section 34.
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Without prejudice to anything contained inanyother lawforthetimebeing
in force, all institutions, whether State Government run or those run by voluntary
organisations forchildren inneed of care andprotection shall, within aperiod of six
months from"'Iedateofcommencement ofthe Juvenile Justice (Care andProtection of
Children) Amendment Act,2006, beregistered underthisActinsuchmanner asmaybe
prescribed." .
Amendment 20. Insection 39ofthe principal Act, fortheExplanation, thefollowing Explanation
of section 39.
shall be substituted, namely:-
'Explanation.- For the purposes ofthis section "restoration of and protection
of achild" means restoration to-
(0) parents;
(b) adopted parents;
(c) foster parents;

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
rII- ~EC.l] THEGAZETfEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 5
::::::::::t:
At
(d) guardian;
(e)fitperso~;
(f)fitinstitution.' .
21. Insection 41oftheprincipal Act,- Amendment
of section 41.
(i)forsub-sections (2),(3)and(4),thefollowing sub-sections shallbesubstituted,
namely:-
'
"(2)Adoptionshallberesortedtofortherehabilitationofthechildrenwho
. are orphan, abandonedor surrenderedthrough such mechanismas may be
I prescribed,
(3) Inkeeping with the provisions ofthe various guidelines for adoption
issued iTomtime to time, by theState Government, or the Central Adoption
Resource Agency and notified by the Central Government, children may be
given in adoption bya court after satisfying itself regarding the investigations
having been carried out, asare required forgiving such children inadoption.
(4)The StateGovernment shallrecognise oneormore ofitsinstitutions or
voluntary organisations in each district as specialised adoption agencies in
such manner as may be prescribed for the placement of orphan, abandoned ot
surrendered children for adoption in accordance with the guidelines notified
undersub-section(3):
.
Provided that the children's homes and the institutions run by the State
Government oravoluntaryorganisation forchildren inneedofcareandprotection,
who are orphan, abandoned or surrendered, shall ensure that these children are
declared iTeeforadoption bytheCommittee and allsuch cases shall bereferred
totheadoption agency inthat district forplacement ofsuchchildren inadoption
in accordance with the guidelines notified under sub-section (3).";
(iz)forsub-section (6),thefollowing sub-section shallbe substituted, namely:-
"(6) The court may allow achild to be given in?doption-
(a)to aperson irrespective ofmarital status; or
(b)toparents toadopt achild ofsamesex irrespective ofthenumber
of livingbiological sons or daughters; or
(c)to childless couples.".
.
22. Forsection57oftheprincipalAct,thdbllowing sectionshallbe substituted, Substitution of
namely:- new section for
. .
section 57.
"57. The State Government maydirect anychild orthejuvenile tobetransferred Transfer
betwe.::n
iTomanychildren's home orspecialhomewithintheStateto anyother children's home,
children's
special home or institution of alike nature or to such institutions outside the State in
homes under
consultation with theconcerned State Government and withtheprior intimation to the theAct, and
Committee or the Board, asthe case may be, and such order shall be deemed to be juvenile homes
oflike nature
operative forthe competent authority ofthe area to which the child or thejuvenile is
in different
sent.".
. parts ofIndia.
23. Insection 59ofthe principal Act, insub-section (2), forthewords "for maximum Amendment
sevendays",thewords"foraperiodgenerallynotexceedingsevendays"shallbesubstituted. ofsection59.

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
--,
6 THEGAZETTEOF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARTII-.-
Insertion of 24. Aftersection62of the principalAct,the followingsectionshallbe inserted,
new section
namely:-
/62A.
Constitution of "62A. Every State Government shall constitut~ a Child Protection Unit for the
Child Stateand,suchUnits foreveryDistrict, consisting ofsuchofficers andother employees
Protection Unit
as may be appointed by that Government, to take up matters relating to children in
responsible for
need ofcare andprotection andjuveniles inconflict with lawwith aviewto ensurethe
implementation
oftheAct implementation of this Act including the establishment and maintenance of homes,
notification ofcompetent authorities inrelation tothese children andtheirrehabilitation
and co-ordination with various official and non-official agencies concerned.".
Amendment of 25. Insection 64oftheprincipal Act,-
section 64.
(i) for thewords "may direct", the words "shall direct" shall be substituted;
(ii)the following proviso andExplanation shall be inserted, nameiy:-
"Provided that the State Government, or as the case maybe the Board,
may, forany adequate and special reason to be recorded inwriting, review the
case ofajuvenile inconflict with law undergoing asentence of imprisonment,
who has ceased to be so on or before the commencement of thisAct, and pass
appropriate order inthe interest of suchjuvenile.
Explanation.-In all cases where a juvenile in conflict with law is
undergoing asentence ofimprisonmen~atanystageonthedateofcommencement
of this Act, his case including the issue ofjuvenility, shall be deemed to be
decided in terms of clause (I) of section 2 and other provisions contained in
this Act and the rules made thereunder, irrespective of the fact that he ceases
to be ajuvenile on orbefore such date and accordingly he shall be sent to the
special home or a fit institution, as the case may be, for the remainder of the
period of the sentence but such sentence'shall not in any case exceed the
maximum period provided in section 15of this Act.".
Amendment 26. In section 68ofthe principal Act,-
of section 68.
(a) insub-section (1), the following proviso shallbe inserted, namely:-
"Provided thattheCentral Government may,frame model rules inrespect
ofalloranyofthe matters withrespect towhichtheState Government maymake
rules under this section, and where any such model,rules have been framed in
respect ofany suchmatter, they shall apply tothe State until the rules inrespect
ofthatmatter ismade bytheStateGovernment andwhile making anysuchrules,
so faras is,practicable, they conform to such model rules.";
(b) insub-section (2),-
(i) inclause (x), after'.thewords, letter andbrackets "sub-section (2)", the
following words, letter andbrackets shall be inserted, namely:-
"and the manner of registration of institutions under sub-section
(3)";
(ii) after clause (xii), the following clau~eshall be inserted, namely:-
"(xiia) rehabilitation mechanism to be resorted to in adoption under sub-
section (2), notification of guidelines under sub-sectbn (3) and the manner of
!ec.ognition of specialised adoption agencies under sub"~ection (4) of sectbn
41;";
(c)sub-section(3)shal!bere-numberedassub-section(4)therecf,andbefore
sub-section (4) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted
namely:-
"(3) Every rule made bythe Central Government under this Act shall be

--- juvenule-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-amendment-act-2006.pdf ---
SEC.I] THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 7
laid,assoonasmaybeafter itismade, before each House ofParliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised inone
session or intwo ormore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session orthe successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree inmaking anymodification intherule orboth Houses agree
thattheruleshould notbemade, therule shallthereafter have effect onlyinsuch
modified form orbe ofnoeffect, asthe case may be;so, however, that anysuch
modification orannulment shall bewithout prejudice tothevalidity of anything
previously done under that rule.".
KN. CHATURVEDI,
Secy. to the Govt. ofIndia.
MGIPMRND-247 4GI(54)-24-08-2006. .,

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
,
~
,
tie me ~e--:fQ;O04/00071200~8I REGISTEREDNO.DL---{N)O4/000712006-{)8
-
'CfiT:
- -
'(the a;a~ette t1f ~iG
,. Ot~I"fI<UI
EX1RA 0 RDINARY
',I
f ~ n-~l
t
PARTII- Section1
~-e-~
PUBLISHEDBYAUTHORITY
tie 5] ~~,~, ~ 20, 2006/ ~ 30,1927
No.5) NEWDEUII,FRIDAYJ,ANUARY20,2006/PAUSA301,927
t
~ 'WT"iff1R~ ~ <f \ t 1fRft ~ ~ ~ 0I'ffi~ q1-~ "ifWI "".~ I
Separate paging isgivento this Part in order that it may be filedas a separate compilation.
MINISTRYOFLAWANDJUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
Ne'fY
Delhi, the 20th J~~'f(;lry, 20061Pausa 30, 1927 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
" 20thJanuary;2006andisherebypublishedforgeneralinformation:-
THE COMMISSIONS FOR PROTECTION OF
CHILDRIGH 5
I'
No. 4o!l~~~:!~~\t"
" "~""..'" n(20th January, ,2006,]
AnActtoprovid~forthe constitutionofaNational Commissionand State
Commissions forProtectionofChildRigQ.tsandChildren'sCourtsfor
providingspeedytrialofoffencesagainstchilqrenorofviolationofchild
rightsandformattersconnectedtherewithor incidentalthereto.
/:','::' :,":\' Ii.
WHEREXISndia participate<i'inthe United Nations (UN) General Assembly Summit in
1990, which adopted aDeclaration onSurviva~,Protection and Development ofChildren;
ANDWHEREASIndia has also acceded to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
(CRC)'onthellthDecember, 1992; '.
ANDWHEREACSRt isanh1temationaltreatythatmakes itincumbent \lponthesignatory
States totake allnecessary steps to protect children's rig~ts enumerated inthe Convention;
ANDWHEREASin order to ensure protection of rights of children one of the recent
initiatives that the Govemmenthav~ taken for Childrenls'the adoption of National Charter
forChildren, 2003; ,
.....
I..'

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
,
\ ,
2 THEGAZEITE OFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARITI-
ANDWHEREASthe UN General Assembly Special Session on Children held in
May, 2002 adopted anOutcome Document ti*d "A WorldFit forChildren" containing the
goals, objectives, strategies and activities tobe undertaken bythemember countries forthe
current decade; ;if
ANDWHEREAiSt isexpedient to enact~::J~wrelat~,gto chil~rento give effect to the
policies adopted bytheGovemmentin thisregard, standards prescribed intheCRC, and all
otherrelevantinternationalinstruments;
, '
BEitenacted byParliament intheFifty-sixthYearoftheRepublic ofIndia asfollows:-
, .,,',
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title, 1.(1)Thi~Act maybecalledtheCommissrons forProtection of ChildRightsAct,2005.
extent and
(2) Itextends to thewhole ofIndia except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
commencement
(3)Itshallcome intoforceonsuchdateastheCentral Government may,bynotification
intheOfficial Gazette, appoint.
Definitions. 2. In thisAct, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission or of the State
Commission, asthe,casemay be;
(b) "child rights" includes the children's rights adopted in the United Nations
convention ontheRights ofthe Child onthe 20th November, 1989 andratified bythe
Government ofIndia onthe 11thDecember, 1992;
(c) "Commission" meanstheNational Commission forProtection ofChild Rights
constituted under section 3;
(d)"Member" means aMember oftheCommission orofthe State Commission,
as the case may be, and includes the Chairperson;
(e)"notification" means anotification published intheOfficial Gazette;
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed byrules made under thisAct;
(g)"State Commission" meansa StateCommission forProtection ofChildRights
"
constituted under section 17.
CHAPTERII
THENATIONACLOMMISSIO)'j, OFCHILDRIGHTS
Constitution 3.(1)TheCentralGovernmentshall,byn~ . n,constitute.abody to beknown as
of National '"
theNational Commission (orProtection...Qf£liijjiRii_to exercise thepowers conferred on,
Commission
and to perform the functions assigned to it,under this Act.
for
Protection of
(2)The Commission shall consist of thefollowing Members, namely :-
Child Rights,
(a) aChairperson who isapenlon of eminehce and hasdone outstanding work
forpromotingthewelfareofchildren;'and,
.
.~:.(b)six Members, outof which at leasttwo sl1allbewomen, from the following,
.
fieki~,tobe appointed bytheCentral Government from amongst persons of eminence,
",
ability,integrity,standingandexperienceip,~' .,
~,
(I) educa~!on; '.: ',' 1
*
(ii) child health, care, welfare ~rchild development; i
(ii/)juvenil.ejustice orcareofneglected ormarginalized children orchildren
"
:'; with disabiliti~s; ",','
. ,
(iv) elimination of child labour or children indistress;
(v) child psychology or sociology;anq
(vi) lawsrelating tochildren.
(3) The office oftheCommission shallbe atDelhi.
,.-
I""

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
SEC1.] THEGAZETIE OFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 3
4. The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint the Chairperson and other Appointment
Members: of
Chairperson
and Members.
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed onthe recommendation of a three
member Selection Committee constituted bytheCentral Government undertheChairmanship
of theMinister in-charge ofthe Ministry ofHuman Resource Development.
5.(1)The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office as such foraterm ofthree Termof
officeand.
years trom the date onwhich he assumes office:
conditionsof
serviceof
Provided thatnoChairperson oraMember shallholdtheoffice formorethantwoterms:
Chairperson
Provided furtPer that no Chairperson or any other Member shall hold office as such and Members.
after he has attained;-
f .
(a) inthe case ofthe Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years; and
(b) inthe case ofa Member, the ageof sixty years.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing 'under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, resign hisoffice atanytime.
6.The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, Salaryand
allowancesof
theChairperson andMembers, shallbesuch asmaybeprescribed bytheCentral Government:
Chairperson
Provided that neither the salary and allowances northe other terms and conditions of andMembers.
service oftheChairperson oraMember, asthecasemaybe,shallbevariedtohisdisadvantage
after hisappointment.
7. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the Chairperson may be removed Removal
fromoffice.
trom hisoffice byanorder oftheCentral Government onthe'ground ofproved misbehaviour
or incapacity.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government
maybyorder remove nom officetheChairperson oranyother Member, iftheChairperson or,
-
asthecasemaybe,suchotherMember,
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
Y id e
. (b)engages during histerm ofoffice '!" . anl'. ' p ~ .~ f a ' mployment outside the duties
ofhisoffice;orl",d'IM~I~,. , . .. , , ,
(c) refuses to act o~becomes inc!,!'..~~!~! ~ting;.;or_..
. (d) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
.
(e) has soabused hisoffice astorender his continuance inoffice detrimental to
the public,interest; or
(Itis convicted and sentenced to impt:isonmen~for an offence. which in the
opiniol\~e CentralGovernment involvesmoralturpitude;or
-
(g) is, without obtaining leave of absence ftom the Commission, absent from
three consecutive meetings ofthe Commission.
(3)No person shall be removed under this section until that person has been given an
opportunity of being heard inthe matter.
8.(1) If the Chairperson or,asthe case may be, aMember, - Vacationof
officeby
(a) becomes subject to any ofthe disqualifications mentioned insection 7; or Chairperson
orMember.
(b) tenders his resignation under sub-section (2) of section 5,
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.
..........
I.' C.

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
4 THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARTIl-
(2)Ifacasual vacancy occurs intheoffice oftheChairperson oraMember, whether by
reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be filled within aperiod of
ninety days by making afresh appointment inaccordance with the provisions of section 4
andtheperson soappointed shallhold office fortheremainder oftheterm of office forwhich
the Chairperson, or aMember, as thecase may be, inwhose place he issoappointed would
have held that office.' .
Vacancies, 9.No actor proceeding of the Commission shall,be invalid merely byreason of-
etc" notto
invalidate
proceedings (~) any vacancy in,or any defect inthe constitution of, the Commission; or
of
Commission,
(b)\any defect in the appointment of a person as the Chairperson or a
Member; q..
!'
(c) anyirregularity intheprocedure of the Commission not affecting the merits
of the case.
Procedurefor 10.(J)TheCommissionshallmeetregularlyatitsofficeatsuchtimeastheChairperson
t
ransactionof thinks fit, but three months shall not intervene between its last and the next meeting.
busmess.
(2)Alldecisions atameeting shall be taken bymajority:
Provided that inthe case of equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence the
person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
(3)Iffor anyreason,theChairperson, isunabletoattendthemeetingoftheCommission,
anyMember chosen bytheMembers present'from amongst themselves atthemeeting, shall
'
preside.
(4)'The Commissionshallobservesuchrulesof procedureinthetransactionof its
businessatameeting,includingthequorumatsuchmeeting,asmaybeprescribedbythe
"
CentralGovernment.
- ,
(5)AllordersanddecisionsoftheCommissionshallbeauthenticatedbytheMember-
SecretaryoranyotherofficeroftheCommi~~f~&)f,.authorised byMember-Secretaryin
thisbehalf. '.
.
.~J:Atit !t!:
Member- , 11. (1) The Centrar Government"S!iaIt6y n tftcati6fi: appoint an officer not below
Secretary,
therankoftheJointSecretaryortheAdditionalSecretarytotheGovernmentofIndia asa
officersand
other' Member-Secretaryofthe Commissionandshallmakeavailableto.the Commissionsuch
employeesof otherofficersandemployeesasmaybenecessaryfoi-theefficientperformanceofitsfunctions.
Commission,
(2)j'J},eMember-Secr~tMyshallberesponsibJe'~fotThe properad~inistration ofthe
affairs orthe Commission and itsday-to-day' ni~~gemenaind sh~lIexercise and discharge
such other powersand perform such otherd~ties as may be prescribed by the Central
I ' ' .
Government. 'I "',
(3) The salary and ~llowances payable to; andithe other terms and conditions of
service oftheMember-Secretary, other officers and'employees, appointed forthepurpose of
the Commission shall be such asmay be prescribed bythe Central Government.
Salariesand 12. The salaries ani;lallowances payabJe to'the Chairperson aQdMembers and the
allowances to
administrative expenses, inGludingsal~ries,allowances andpensions payable totheMember-
be paidoutof
Secretary, other officers and emph;>yeesreferred to in section 11, shall be paid out of the
grants.
grantsreferredtoinsub-section(1)ofsection27.
tf-tl
r_.

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
SEC.1] THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 5
CHAPTERill
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION
13. (1)The Commission shall perform alloranyofthefollowing functions, namely:- Functions of
Commission.
(a)examine andreview thesafeguards provided byorunder anylawforthetime
being in force for the protection of child rights and recommend measures for their
effectiveimplementation;
.
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other intervals, as
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working ofthose safeguards;
(c) inquire intoviolation ofchildrights andrecommend initiation ofproceedings
in such c~es;
\
(d) e~ine allfactors that inhibittheenjoyment ofrights ofchildren affected by
terrorism, ~bmmunal violence, riots, natural disaster, domestic violence, HIV/AIDS,
trafficking: maltreatment, torture and exploitation, pornography and prostitution and
recommendappropriateremedialmeasures;
.
(e)look intothematters relating tochildren inneed ofspecial care andprotection
includingchildrenindistress,marginalizedanddisadvantagedchildren,childrenin
,
conflict with law,juveniles, children without family and children of prisoners and
recommend appropriate remedial measures;
(j) study treaties and other international instruments and undertake periodical
review ofexisting policies, programmes and other activities onchild rights and make
recommendations fortheir effective implementation inthe best interest ofchildren;
(g) undertake and promote research inthe field of child rights;
(h)spread child rights literacy amongvarious sections ofthesociety andpromote
.awareness of the safeguards available for protection of these rights through
publications, the media, seminars and other available means;
(I) inspect or cause to be inspected anyjuvenile custodial home, or any other
place of residence or institution meant for children, under the control of the Central
Government orany State Government oranyother authority, including any institution
run byasocial organisation; where children aredetained or lodged forthepurpose of
treatment, reformation or protection and take upwith these authoritIes for remedial
action, if found ~ecessary;
(j)inquireintocomplaintsand~~~otice ofmattersrelatingto,-
(0deprivationandviolati~~J!~~rll~~~;-
~
(il)non-implementation oflaws providing forprotection and development
of children;
(iil) non-compliance ofpolicy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed
at,mitigating hardships to and ensuring welfare of the children and to provide
relief to such children,
.,;
or tak.6.,U. p the issues arising out of such matterS with appropriate authorities; and
(k) such other functions as itmay consider necessary forthepromotion of child
rights and any other matter incidental to the above functions.
(2) The Commission shall not inquire into any matter which is pending before a State
Commission oranyotherCommissiondulyconstitutedunderanylawforthetimebeinginforce.
14. (1)1"heCommission shall,while inquiring intoanymatter referred toinclause (J)of Powers
relatingto
sub-section'(1) of section 13have allthepowers ofacivil court trying asuitunder the Code
inquiries.
5of 1908.
ofCivil Procedure, 1908and, inparticular, inrespect ofth~ following matters, namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;.
(b) discovery and production of any document;
t:'-4ffr

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
6 THEGAZEITE OFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARlTl-
(c) receiving evidence onaffidavits;
(d)requisitioning anypublic record orcopythereof fromanycourt oroffice; and
(e) issuing commissions for theexamination of witnesses or documents.
(2) The Commission shall have thepower to forward any case to aMagistrate having
jurisdiction to try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall
proceed to hear the complaint against the accused as ifthe case has been forwarded to him
under section 346oftheCode ofCriminal Procedure, 1973. 2of 1974.
Steps after IS. The Commission may take any ofthe following steps upon the completion of an
inquiry. inquiry held under thisAct, namely :- .
(l) where the inquiry discloses, the Commission ofviolation ofchild rights of a
serious ri~ure orcontravention ofprovisions ofany law forthetime being inforce, it
mayrecoinmend totheconcerned Governmentor,a~oritythe initiation ofproceedings
. for prosecutionor suchother actionas the Commissionmaydeem fit against.the
concerned person or persons;
(il)approach theSupreme Court ortheHigh Court concerned forsuchdirection!;,
orders or writs as that Court may deem necessary;
(iii) recommend totheconcerned Government orauthority forthegrant ofsuch
interimrelieftothevictimorthemembers ofhisfamilyastheCommi!isionmayconsider
necessary.
Annual and 16. (1) The Commission shall submit anannual report totheCentral Government and .
.
special
tothe State Government concerned andmayatanytimesubmit special reports onanymatter
reports of
Commission. which, in its opinion, is of such urgency or importance that it should not be deferred till
submission of the annual report.
.
. (2) The Central Government andtheStateGovernment concerned, asthecase maybe,
shall cause theannual andspecial reports oftheCommission tobe laidbefore each House of
Parliament ortheStateLegis,laturerespectively, asthecasemaybe,alongwithamemorandum
of action taken or proposed tobe taken ontherecommendations ofthe Commission andthe
~ reaSons fornon-acceptance oftherecommendations, ifany,within aperiod ofoneyear from
the date of receipt of such report.
(3) The annual report shall beprepared insuch form, manner andcontain such details
as may be prescribed bythe Central GovernJ.t1~i!"t,.~';m!~,'iW"
CHAFfER IV,
"~""~ ~"" .."'"
STATECOMMISSIONSFORPROTECTIONOFCHILD RlGHTS
Constitution 17.(1)AStateGovernmentmayconstituteabodytobeknownasthe,~ ....(name of
of State
the State) Commission forProtection ofChild Rights to exercise thepowers conferred upon,
Commission
for and to perform the functions assigned to, aState Comm~;ss~onunder this Chapter.
Protectionof -
(2)XJ1eS.tate Commission shall consist of thefollowiQgMembers, namely:
ChildRights. '... .
(0)aChairpersonwhoisapersonofeminef!.ceandhasdoneoutstandingwork
forpromotingthewelfareofchildren;and
,'. "
~
(b) sixMembers, outof which at,least two shall women, from the following
fields, to be appointed bythe State Government from amongst persons of eminence,
abilj,ty,integrity,standingande~periencein,~
,: ' '
(i) education;
(if)child health, care, welfare or child development;
. .
(iil)juvenile justice orcareofneglected ormarginalized childrenorchildren
with disabilities;
t:-'49 ' .
" .

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
SEC.1] THEGAZETIE OFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 7
(iv) elimination ofchild labour or children indistress;
(v) child psychology or sociology; and
(VI)lawsrelating to children.
(3) The' headquarter of the State Commission shall be at such place as the State
Government may,bynotification, specify.
. 18.TheStateGovern.mensthall,bynotificationa,ppointtheChairpersonandother Appointment
Members: of
Chairperson
Provided that the Chairperson shall be appointed on the recommendation of a three and other
Members.
Member Selection Committee constituted bytheState Government under theChairmanship
oftheMinisterin-char~ oftheDepartmentdealingwithchildren.
.
Term of
19. (1)The Chairpe,rsonandevery Member shall hold office assuch foraterm ofthree
office and
years ITomthe date on Whichhe assumes office:
conditions of
Provided thatnoChairperson oraMember shallhold theoffice formore thantwoterms: service of
Chairperson
Provided further that no Chairperson or any other Member shall hold office as such and Members.
after he has attained-
(0) inthe case of Chairperson, the age of sixty-five years; and
(b) inthe case ofaMember, the age ofsixty years.
(2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the
State Government, resign his office atanytime.
20. The salaries andallowances payable to,and other terms and conditions ofservice Salaryand
allowances of
of,theChairperson andMembers shallbesuchasmaybeprescribed bytheStateGovernment:
Chairperson
Provided that neither the salary and allowances northe other terms and conditions of and Members.
service oftheChairperson oraMember, asthecasemaybe,shallbevariedtohisdisadvantage
after his appointment.
21. (I) The State Government shall, by notification, appoint an officer not below the. Secretary,
officers and
rank ofthe Secretary to the State Government asthe Secretary ofthe State Commission and
other
shall make available to the State Commission such other officers and employees as may be
employees of
.necessaryfortheefficient~:rformanceofitsfunctions. . the State
Commission.
(2)The Secretary shallberesponsible fortheproper administration oftheaffairs ofthe
State Commission and its day-to-day management. , rcise and discharge such
otherpowersand.performsuchotherdutiesasmay'bepresc" . bytheStateGovernment.
'
(3) The salary and allowan..£.espayable tQ...~.terms and conditions of
service oftheSecretary, other officers and employees, appointed forthepurpose oftheState
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed bythe State Government.
22. The salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members and the Salariesand
allowancesto
administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances andpensions payable totheSecretary,
bepaidoutof
other officers andePlployees referred toinsection 21, shall be paid outofthegran~sreferred
grants.
toinsub-section(1)~fsection28.
.
'
Annualand
23. (1) The State Commission shall submit an annual report to the State Government
special
and may at any time submit special reports on any matter which, in its opinion, is of such
reportsof
urgency or importance that itshould notbe deferred till submission ofthe annual report. State
Commission.
(2)The,StateGovernment shallcause allthereportsreJerred, to insub-section (1)tobe
laid before each H9use of State Legislature, where itconsists of two Houses, or where such
Legislature consists 'ofone House, before that House along with amemorandum~xplaining
the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and
the reasons forthe non-acceptance, ifany, of any of such recommendations.
(3) The annual report shall beprepared insuchform, manner andcontain such details
.
asmaybeprescribedbytheStateGovernment. "
t:.~

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
8 THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARTII-
Application 24.Theprovisionsofsections7,8,9,10, sub-section(1)ofsection13andsections14
of certain
and 15shallapplytoa StateCommissionandshallhaveeffect,subjectto the following
provisions
modifications,namely:-
relating to
National
Commission (a) references to "Commission" shall be construed as references to "State
for Commission";
Protection of
Child Rights (b) referencesto "Central Government"shall be construedas references to
to State "StateGovernment";and
Commissions.
(c) references to "Member-Secretary" shall be construed as references to
"Secretary".
CHAPTERV
CHILDREN'S CoURTS
Children's 25. Forthepurpose ofproviding speedytrialofoffences against children orofviolation
Courts,
of child rights, the State Government may,with the concurrence of the Chief Justice ofthe
High Court, bynotification, specifYat least acourt intheState orspecifY,foreach district, a
Court of Session to be aChildren's Court to trythe sai4 offences:
Providedthatnothinginthissectionshallapplyif-
(a) a Court of Session isalready specified as aspecial court; or
(b) aspecial court isalready constituted,
for such offences under anyother lawforthetime being inforce.
Special Public 26. 'For every Children's Court, theState Government shall, bynotification, specify a
Prosecutor,
Public Prosecutor or appoint an advocate who has been in practice as an advocate fornot
lessthan seven years, as aSpecial Public Prosecutor forthe purpose ofconducting cases in
that Court.
CHAPTERVI
\
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
Grants by 27. (1)The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made byParliament by
Central lawinthis behalf,payto the Commission'~ tssuchsumsofmoneyasthe
Government. "~.
Central Government maythink fit forbeing utilised" or epurposes ofthisAct.
- -~"~~':;;"'~'."-""-
(2)The Commission may spend sucl1sums ofmoney as itthinks fitforperforming the
functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out ofthe OJ,
grants referred to in sub-section (1).
Grants by 28. (1)The StateGovernment shall,afterdueapproPriation made byLegislature bylaw
State
inthisbehalf, paytothe State Commission bywayofgrants$uchsums ofmoney asthe State
Governments',
Governmen.H,hay think fit forbeing utilised forthepurposes ofthisAct.
(2)The StateCommission mayspend suchsumsofmoney asitthinksfitforperforming
the functions under Chapter III of this Act, and such sums shall betreated as expenditure
payableoutofthegrantsreferredtoinsub-section(1).
"
Accounts and 29. (1)The Commission shallmaintain proper accounts andother relevant records and
audit of
prepare aI\"iUlnualstatement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed bythe Central
Commission.
Government inconsultation with theComptroller andAuditor-General ofIndia.
(2) The accounts oftheCommission shall be audited bythe Comptroller andAuditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
r;.r

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
SEC.I] THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY 9
(3)TheComptroller andAud,itor-Generalandanyperson appointed byhiminconnection
with the audit ofthe accounts ofthe Commission under thisAct shall, have the same rights
and privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and
Auditor-General generally has inconnection withthe audit ofGovernment accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of.the
Commission.
(4) The accountsof the Commissionas certifiedby the ComptrollerandAuditor-
Generaloranyotherpersonappointedbyhiminthisbehalf,togetherwiththeauditreport
thereonshallbeforwardedannuallytotheCentralGovernmentbytheCommissionandthe
CentralGovernmeptshallcausethe audit reportto be laid,as soonas maybe after it is
received,beforeeacbHouseofParliament.
.
'j
30. (1)TheSUiteCommission shallmaintain proper accounts andotherrelevant records Accounts and
audit ofState
and prepare an annual statement ofaccounts insuch form asmay be prescribed bythe State
Commission.
Government incon~ultation withtheComptroller andAuditor-General ofIndia.
(2) The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the ColTlptrollerand
Auditor-General atsuch intervals asmay be specified byhim and any expenditure incurred
inconnection with such audit shall be payable bythe State Commission tothe Comptroller
andAuditor-General. .
(3)TheComptroller andAuditor-General andanyperson appointed byhiminconnection
with the audit of the accounts of the State Commission under thisAct shall, have the same
rights and privileges andtheauthority inconnection with such audit astheComptroller and
Auditor-General generally hasinconnection withthe audit ofGovernment accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the'State
Commission.
(4)The accounts oftheState Commission ascertified bytheComptroller andAuditor-
General or any other person appointed byhim inthis behalf, together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the State Government bythe State Commission and
the State Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is
received, before the State Legislature.
CHAPTERvn
. .
""~~ill~!ttLf~~"
MISCELLANEOUS ,"'
Protectionof -_.
31. ,No suit, prosecution or other legaT~~e~~1fi"snaIHie against-the Central
actiontaken
Government, theState Government, theCommission, the StateCommission, oranyMember
in good faith.
thereof or any person acting under the direction either of the Central Government, State
Government, Commission ortheState Commission, inrespect of anything which,is ingood
faith done or intended to be done inpursuance of this Act or of any rules ma(ie thereunder
or inrespect of the publication byor under the authority of the Central Government, State
Government, .e.o.tnmission, orthe State Commission ofanyreport or paper.
32. Every Member oftheCommission, StateCommission and every officer appointed Chairperson,
in the Commission or the State Commission to exercise functions under this Act shall be Members and
other officers
45 of 1860. deemed to be apublic servant within the meaning of section 21ofthe Indian Penal Code.
to be public
servant.
33. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall be Directions by
Central
guided by suth' directions on questions of policy relating to national purposes, as may be
Government.
. given to itbythe Central Government.
(2) If any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Commission asto
whether aquestion isorisnotaquestion ofpolicy relating tonational purposes, thedecision
oftheCentral Government thereon shall be final.
,. .A
,.. ~1
0"..

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
10 THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY [PARTIT-
Returns or 34. TheCommissionshallfurnishto theCentralGovernmentsuchreturnsor other
information.
informationwithrespecttoitsactivitiesastheCentralGovernmentmay,fromtimetotime,
require.
Powerof 35. (1) The CentralGovernmentmay,bynotification,makerulesto carry out the
Central provisionsofthisAct.
Government
tomakerules. (2)Inparticular,andwithoutprejudicetothegeneralityoftheforegoingpower,such
rulesmayprovideforaHoranyofthefollowingmatters,namely:-
(a)terms and conditionsof serviceof the Chairpersonand Membersof the
Commissionandtheirsalariesandallowancesundersection6;
(b)th~procedureto be followedbytheCommissioninthetransactionof its
businessat~meeting undersub-section(4)ofsection10;
..
(e)thepowersanddutieswhichmaybeexercisedandperformedbytheMember-
Secretaryofthe Commissionunder.sub-section(2)ofsection11; .
(d)the salaryand allowancesand other terms and conditions of serviceof
officersandotheremployeesoftheCommissionundersub-section(3)ofsection11;
and
(e) form of the statement of accounts and other records to be prepared bythe
Commission under sub-section (1) ofsection 29.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after itis made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which'may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both
Houses agree that therule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification orannulment shall be without prejudice tothevalidity ofanything previously
doneunderthatrule. .
\ Powerof 36.(1)TheStateGovernmentmay,bynotification,makerulestocarryouttheprovisions
.
State ofthisAct.
Government
to make rules.
(2)Inparticular,andwithoutprejudicet0~lg~lity oftheforegoingpower,such
rulesmayprovideforalloranyofthefollowingmatters,namely:-
,,",'
.' (a)termsandconditionsofserviceo~~ii1ij)ersO1fand Members'oftheState
Commissionandtheirsalariesandallowancesunder"section20;
(b)theproceduretobefollowedby,theStateCommissioninthetransactionof
itsbusinessatameetingundersub-section(4)ofsection 10readwithsection24;
(c)thepowers anddutieswhichmaybeexercised andperformed bytheSecretary
of the stateCommission under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(d) the salary and allowances and other tetms and conditions of service of
officers and other employees of the State Commission under sub-section (3) of
section 21; and
(e) form of the statement of accounts and other records to be prepared bythe
StateCOmmissionundersub-section(1)ofsection30.
", '. ",'" '
(3) Every rule made bythe State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon
asmaybeafter itismad~..before each House ofthe StateLegi~lature where itconsists oftwo
Houses, or where such State Legislature consists of one.H~~se, before that House.
t:te
"!

--- protection-of-child-rights-act-2005.pdf ---
"
SEC1.] THEGAZETTEOFINPIAEXTRAORDINARY II
37. (1)Ifany difficulty arises ingiving effect tothe provisions ofthisAct, theCentral Powerto
remove
Gov.ernment may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
difficulties.
inconsistent with the provisions ofthis Act, asmay appear to benecessary forremoving the
difficulty:
Provided that noorder shallbemade under thissection aftertheexpiry oftheperiod of
two years from the date of commencement ofthisAct.
(2)Every order made under thissection shallbe laid,assoon asmaybeafter itismade,
before each House ofParliament.
T.K.VISWANATHAN,
Secy.to the Govt: ofIndia.
~
.:..':--
or
'.'..
PRINTED BYTHE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OFINDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2006.
MGIPRMND--5068GI{S-3}-23.01.2006.
t:--
,. ""c"

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 1st September, 2022
G.S.R. 678(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 110 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), the Central Government hereby makes the
following amendments to the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement
(1) These rules may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Amendment Rules,
2022.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
rules), in sub-rule (1) of rule 2,–
(i) clause (iv) shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(vi a) “conflict of interest” means “a situation in which a person has a private or personal interest sufficient
to appear to influence the objective exercise of his or her official duties and where such person shall be
ineligible to be associated with any statutory structure defined under the Act.”
(iii) in clause (ix),–
(a) for sub-clause (f), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(f) rescue, restoration and follow up”;
(b) for sub-clause (g), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(g) social mainstreaming and rehabilitation”;
(iv) for clause (xii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(xii) Person-in-charge or Superintendent” means a person appointed for the control and management of the
Child Care Institution”;
(v) in clause (xiv), for the words “designated in every”, the words “designated for every” shall be substituted;
(vi) in clause (xviii),–
(a) for the words “a graduate with minimum seven years of experience in child education and development”,
the words “a graduate with minimum three years of experience in matters relating to child education and
development” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “under the Act or these rules”, the words “under the Act or the rules made thereunder” shall
be substituted;
(c) in Explanation, for the words “this definition, it is clarified that”, the words “this clause, it is hereby
clarified” shall be substituted.
3. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (3) of rule 4, after the words “shall not be less than thirty five years of age”, the
words “and shall not be more than sixty-five years of age on the date of notification” shall be inserted.
4. In the principal rules, in rule 5,–
(i) in sub-rule (2), the words “which shall not be continuous” shall be omitted.
(ii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5) If any complaint is made against a member of the Board, the State Government shall hold necessary inquiry
except in respect of judicial officers; complaints against judicial officers shall be forwarded to the Registrar
of the High Court for action.
(6) The State Government shall complete the inquiry within a period of two months and take appropriate action
within one month.
(7) If a criminal case is registered against the member concerned, if necessary the State Government may
suspend the member immediately pending inquiry, for such term as appropriate; or after holding an inquiry
and giving an opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 75
5. In the principal rules, in rule 6,–
(i) in sub-rule (2), for the words “un-connected with the case remains”, the words “not connected with the case
shall not remain”, shall be substituted.
(ii) after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7A) The Board may conduct its sittings through video conferencing, in case there are constraints limiting
physical movement of the child alleged to be in conflict with law, or the Board Members including the
Chairperson.
Provided if the child’s case requires the presence of a doctor or psychiatrist or counsellor or physical
attention, the sitting shall be conducted in the premises as provided in sub-rule(1) of rule 6.”.
6. In the principal rules, in rule 7,–
(i) in clause (v) of sub-rule (1), for the words “to the District Child Protection Unit”, the words “to the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) for clause (vi) of sub-rule (1), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely: -
“(vi) maintain a suggestion box or grievance redressal box in the premises of the Board or in the Observation
Home or Special Home or Place of Safety at a prominent place to encourage inputs from children and adults
alike which shall be operated by the nominee of the Principal Magistrate.
(vi a) an online grievance redressal system shall also be created by the State Government for receipt of
suggestion or grievance which may be accessed by the Board;”;
(iii) for clause (viii) of sub-rule (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(viii) review the Children's Suggestion or Complaint Book during every visit in the Child Care Institution
and also carry out random one to one and group interaction with children in the Child Care Institutions in
absence of the Child Care Institution staff and Person-in-Charge to understand concerns and issues of
children, to determine their well-being and provide inputs and recommendations accordingly to such Child
Care Institutions.”.
7. In the principal rules, in rule 8,–
(i) after clause (iii) of sub-rule (3), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iii a) also inform the child and the parent or guardian immediately regarding the rights and privileges of the
child under the Act and rules;
(iii b) rights of the child shall also be displayed in every police station and at prominent places in the
Observation Homes, Special Homes, Place of Safety;”.
(ii) in sub-rule (6), the words “and Childline Services” shall be omitted;
8. In the principal rules, in rule 9,–
(i) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The Board shall ensure that the information regarding the child referred to in sub-rule (2) is uploaded on
a portal, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.”.
(ii) in sub-rule (3), for the word and figure “section 83”, the word and figure “section 78 and section 83” shall be
substituted.
9. In the principal rules, in rule 12,–
(i) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The District Magistrate shall on the basis of the quarterly report submitted in sub-rule (2) examine the
reasons for pendency, discrepancies observed during visits to the Observation Homes and the like and shall
make its recommendations to the authorities like Police, Medical, District Legal Services Authority or any
other concerned authority, for reduction of pendency of cases before the Board and to take appropriate action
against the authorities as deemed fit.
(2B) Where the review by the District Magistrate discloses the reasons for pendency due to the members of the
Board, then the District Magistrate shall inform the State Child Protection Society.
(2C) The State Child Protection Society shall on the basis of the report submitted by the District Magistrate
recommend for appropriate action to the State Government.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (3), for the words “the Selection Committee constituted under rule 87 of these rules”, the words “the
Registrar of the High Court and a copy shall also be forwarded to the District Magistrate.” shall be substituted.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
10. In the principal rules, in rule 15,–
(i) for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be substituted namely:–
“(3) The Chairperson and the members shall be above the age of thirty-five years and not more than sixty five
years and shall have a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or sociology or human
health or education or human development or special education for differently abled children and has been
actively involved in health, education or welfare activities pertaining to children for seven years or is a
practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or law or social work or sociology or
human health or education or human development or special education for differently abled children.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (4), the following proviso shall be inserted namely:–
“Provided that nothing contained in this sub-rule shall be a bar in case of a member being appointed as
Chairperson”;
(iii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4A) The person applying for the post of the Chairperson or member of the Committee shall submit an
affidavit, as per Form 49, certifying that the applicant is not barred by any of the conditions laid down in sub-
section 4A of section 27 of the Act. The appropriate Government shall then verify the same as per norm.
(4B) A person associated with an organisation receiving foreign contribution shall not be eligible to be a
Chairperson or member of the Committee.
(4C) Any person working in the implementation of the Act in any Non-Government Organisation or any
organisation, performing such functions which may cause conflict of interest in discharge of their duties as
the Chairperson or member of the Committee shall not be eligible for appointment as the Chairperson and
member of the Committee.
Explanation: For the removal of doubt, it is hereby clarified that, this may include but is not limited to any of
the following situations within the territorial jurisdiction of the Committee:
(a) any family member is a member of any non-governmental organisation;
(b) close relation is a member of any non-governmental organisation ;
(c) cases of non-governmental organisations or persons working in a district for rescue and
rehabilitation;
(d) a person representing a person who runs a Child Care Institution or member of the Board or Trust of
any non-governmental organisation.
(4D) If any complaint is made against a Chairperson or member of the Committee, the State Government
shall hold an inquiry and if necessary, suspend the person immediately pending inquiry. The inquiry shall be
completed within a period of two months and the State Government may take appropriate action within one
month of completion of the inquiry.
(4E) No Chairperson or member of the Committee shall be removed without holding an inquiry by the State
Government and until that person has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(4F) If a criminal case is registered against the Chairperson or member concerned, if necessary the
Government may suspend the concerned Chairperson or member, immediately pending inquiry, for such term
as appropriate, or after holding an inquiry and giving an opportunity of being heard in the matter.”.
11. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (4) of rule 16, for the words “un-connected with the case remains”, the words
“not connected with the case shall not remain”, shall be substituted.
12. In rule 17 of the principal rules,–
(i) after clause (iii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(iii a) Quarterly reports of inspection conducted under clause (viii) of section 30 of the Act shall be submitted,
as and when required, for the purpose of monitoring under section 109 of the Act;”;
(ii) for clause (iv), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(iv) review the Children's Suggestion or Complaint Book during every visit in the Child Care Institution and
also carry out random one to one and group interaction with children in the Child Care Institutions in absence
of Child Care Institution staff and Person-in-Charge to understand concerns and issues of children to determine
their well-being and provide inputs and recommendations accordingly to the Child Care Institutions;”;
(iii) after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 77
“(v a) for the purposes of sub-section (4) of section 40 of the Act, the Committee shall submit a quarterly
information in Form 16 regarding restored, dead and runaway children to the State Government and the
District Magistrate;”;
(iv) after clause (vii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(vii a) maintain case records of at least five years.”;
(v) in clause (viii), after the words “a software may be developed by the State Government”, the words “such that
the case records of at least five years are maintained.” shall be inserted;
(vi) after clause (viii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ix) ensure that children without having a legal guardian irrespective of their age are expeditiously declared
legally free for adoption within the timeline as provided in the Act, rules and regulations;
(x) interact with older children living in the Child Care Institutions having no guardians and also with such
children living in the Child Care Institutions who are not in contact with their guardians for several years and
counsel such children about the benefit of family based care including foster care and adoption;
(xi) interact with all concerned both in physical and virtual modes in case of production of the child before
the Committee, while giving instructions to the District Child Protection Unit or Specialised Adoption
Agency or Child Care Institution, as the case may be, and in the process of declaring a child legally free for
adoption.”.
13. In the principal rules, in rule 18,–
(i) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A) In extraordinary situations, when the movement of the Child or the Committee is restricted due to
unforeseen circumstances, the child may be presented before the Committee through virtual mode and the
Committee shall physically interact with the Child at the first opportunity.”;
(ii) after sub-rule (9), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(10) The Committee shall ensure that the information regarding the child referred to in this rule is uploaded on
a portal, as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.”.
14. In the principal rules, in rule 19,–
(i) in sub-rule (3), after the words “or Child Welfare Officer”, the words “or designated officer by the District
Child Protection Unit” shall be inserted.
(ii) for sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be substituted, namely: -
“(4) In case of placement of the child in non-institutional care, the Committee shall direct the District Child
Protection Unit concerned to develop an individual care plan in Form 7 and in case of institutional care, shall
direct the management of the Child Care Institution concerned to develop an individual care plan in Form 7,
which includes a rehabilitation plan.
(4A) The individual care plan prepared for every child whether in the institutional care or non-institutional care
shall be developed based on the case history, circumstances and individual needs of the child.
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub-rule, the expression non-institutional care does not include
adoption.”;
(iii) after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7A) The Committee, while disposing the case and placing the child in an institution shall ensure that the
institution is a registered Child Care Institution under section 41 of the Act or a fit facility declared under
section 51 of the Act.”;
(iv) in sub-rule (8), after the words “or Child Welfare Officer”, the words “or designated officer by the District
Child Protection Unit” shall be inserted;
(v) after sub-rule (8), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(8A) The District Child Protection Unit after completing the social investigation within fifteen days shall
submit the report to the Child Welfare Committee.”;
(vi) in sub-rule (17), after the words “or Child Welfare Officer of the institution”, the words “or designated officer
by the District Child Protection Unit” shall be inserted.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
15. In the principal rules, in rule 20,–
(i) in sub-rule (3), for the words “the Selection Committee constituted under rule 87 of these rules”, the words “the
State Child Protection Society” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4) Any grievance arising out of the functioning of the Committee may be filed by the affected child or anyone
connected with the child before the District Magistrate, who shall dispose the same within a period of thirty days
by passing appropriate orders.”.
16. In the principal rules, for the rule 21, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“21. Manner of Registration of Child Care Institutions
(1) All institutions running institutional care services for children in need of care and protection or children in
conflict with law, whether run by the Government or voluntary organisation, shall be registered under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the Act, irrespective of being registered or licensed under any other Act for the time
being in force.
(2) All such institutions shall make an application in Form 27 together with a copy each of rules, bye-laws,
memorandum of association, list of governing body, office bearers, list of trustees, balance sheet of preceding
three years, statement of past record of social or public service provided by the institution to the State
Government, Darpan Identification from National Institution for Transforming India Aayog and a declaration
from the person or the organisation regarding any previous conviction record or involvement in any immoral
act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child labour or that it has not been black listed by the State
Government or District Administration;
(3) The State Government shall, after receipt of the application for registration, send the application to the
District Magistrate within fifteen days of receipt of the application to call for recommendations of the District
Magistrate in Form 46A.
(4) The District Magistrate may examine the requests vis-a-vis need in the district within thirty days from the
date of receipt of application from the State Government.
(5) The District Magistrate shall verify credibility, background and previous record of the Child Care
Institution and the agency or individual promoting the institution and make specific recommendations to the
State Government for consideration.
(6) The following shall be considered by the District Magistrate while making recommendations, namely:–
(i) registration of the organisation under any law for the time being in force;
(ii) details of physical infrastructure, water and electricity facilities, sanitation and hygiene, recreation
facilities and nutrition plan;
(iii) financial position of the organisation and maintenance of documents along with audited statement of
accounts for the previous three years;
(iv) resolution of the Governing Body to run the institution or an open shelter;
(v) plan of action for providing services for children such as medical, vocational, educational, counselling,
and the like, in case of new applicants and details of such services provided in case of existing
institutions ;
(vi) arrangements of safety, security, transportation and support and access for differently-abled children;
(vii) details of other support services run by the organisation;
(viii) the institution is near a school within such area or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed under
the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009);
(ix) details of linkages and networking with other governmental, non-governmental, corporate and other
community based agencies on providing need-based services to the children;
(x) details of existing staff with their qualification and experience;
(xi) details of registration under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010) and funds
available, if any;
(xii) a declaration from the person or the organisation regarding any previous conviction record or
involvement in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child labour;
(xiii) any other criteria as prescribed by the State Government.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 79
(xiv) while making the recommendation, the District Magistrate shall assess the actual requirement of
additional institutions, keeping in mind the occupancy levels of the existing institutions and the capacity
of authorities under section 54 of the Act so that they can ensure compliance of the Child Care
Institutions with provisions of the Act; and
(xv) certify to the effect that the relevant provisions of the Act and rules have been complied with.
(7) The State Government shall after verifying that provisions exist in the institution for the care and
protection of children, health, education, boarding and lodging facilities, vocational facilities and rehabilitation
as per the Act and the rules, and taking into account the requirements of the district and recommendation from
the District Magistrate about the applicant institution, may issue a registration certification to such institution
under sub- section (1) of section 41 of the Act in Form 28.
(8) The State Government, while taking a decision on the application for registration, shall consider the
following namely:–
(i) recommendations of the District Magistrate;
(ii) confirm that all the eligibility conditions as per the Act are met with;
(iii) any other criteria as prescribed by the Centre or the State Government has also been followed.
(9) The State Government, shall not grant provisional registration where adequate facilities do not exist in the
institution applying for registration and the State Government shall issue an order before the expiry of one
month from the date of receipt of the application that the institution is not entitled for even provisional
registration.
(10) The District Magistrate shall conduct a detailed annual inspection of all the institutions in the district
which have been registered under the Act and such inspection shall be carried out in the format as provided
under Form 46.
(11) If the inspection or the annual review reveals that there is unsatisfactory compliance with the standards of
care, protection, rehabilitation and reintegration services and management of the institution as laid down under
the Act and the rules or the facilities are inadequate, the State Government shall, at any time, serve notice on
the management of the institution and after giving an opportunity of being heard, declare within a period of
sixty days from the date of the detailed inspection or annual review as the case may be, that the registration of
the institution or organisation, shall stand withdrawn or cancelled from a date specified in the notice and from
the said date, the institution shall cease to be an institution registered under sub-section (1) of section 41of the
Act.
(12) When an institution ceases to be an institution registered under the Act or has failed to apply for
registration within the time frame laid down in the said provision or has not been granted provisional
registration, the said institution shall be managed by the State Government or the children placed therein shall
be transferred by the order of the Board or the Committee, to some other institution, registered under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the Act.
(13) All institutions shall be bound to seek renewal of registration three months prior to the expiry of the period
of registration and in case of their failure to seek renewal of registration before the expiry of the period of
registration of the institution, the institution shall cease to be an institution registered under sub- section (1) of
section 41 of the Act and provisions of sub-rule (8) of this rule shall apply.
(14) An application for renewal of registration of an institution shall be disposed of within sixty days from the
date of receipt of application.
(15) The decision on renewal of registration shall be based on the annual inspection done by the District
Magistrate under Form 46A in the year in which renewal is sought.
(16) The Central Government shall facilitate developing a model online system for receipt and processing of
applications and grant or cancellation of registration, and in the interim the systems existing in the States and
Union territories shall continue.”.
17. In the principal rules, after rule 21, the following rule shall be inserted namely:–
“21A Manner of registration of Group Foster Care.–
(1) Every Group Foster Care shall be registered under the Act in a manner as prescribed under these rules.
(2) All such Foster Families willing to undertake children under Group Foster Care shall make an application to
the State Government. At the time of application, the Foster Family shall also make declaration under Form 50

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
regarding any previous conviction record or involvement in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or
employment of child labour or that it has not been black listed by the State Government.
(3) The appropriate Government shall then verify the declaration form of the Foster Family and if found
otherwise by the State Government, the Foster Family shall be liable for punitive action and immediate
disqualification.
(4) Within a month of receipt of application for registration of Group Foster Care, the application shall be
referred to the concerned District Magistrate by the State Government, for conducting inspection of the Group
Foster Care and sending its recommendations.
(5) The District Magistrate shall conduct inspection and send its recommendation as per Form 47 within thirty
days from the date of receipt of call of recommendation from the State Government.
(6) The District Magistrate while making its recommendations for registration of Group Foster Care shall
examine that the Group Foster Care has the following facilities, namely:–
(a) provide adequate food, clothing and shelter and education;
(b) provide care, support and treatment for child’s overall physical, emotional and mental health;
(c) ensure protection from exploitation, maltreatment, harm, neglect and abuse;
(d) provide age appropriate facilities for recreation, extra-curricular activities such as sports, music, dance,
drama, art, and the like;
(e) provide vocational training according to the interests of the child;
(f) mandatory police verification of the individuals;
(g) income tax returns of the individuals for the past three years;
(7) After considering the recommendations of the District Magistrate and verifying that provisions exist in the
facility for the care and protection of children, health, education, boarding and lodging facilities, vocational
facilities, the State Government may issue a registration certificate in Form 48.
(8) The District Magistrate shall conduct a detailed inspection to review annually after registration of the
institution as per Form 47.
(9) As mandated under section 44 of the Act, the Child Welfare Committee shall conduct monthly inspection of
Group Foster Care as per Form 47.
(10) The inspection reports of the District Magistrate, the Inspection Committees, and the Child Welfare
Committees shall be shared with the District Child Protection Unit within a period of fifteen days of inspection
for taking corrective action.
(11) Wherever the District Magistrate or the Inspection Committees or the Child Welfare Committee finds the
Group Foster Care to be in violation of the provisions of the Act and these rules, the District Magistrate or the
Committee shall recommend cancellation of registration of the facility to the State Government and forthwith
shift the children from the facility by following due process.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, cancellation of registration shall be for a term not less than five years.”.
18. In the principal rules, in rule 23,–
(i) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(1A) while placing the child in foster care, the State Government shall ensure the following in order of
preference, namely: -
(i) child is placed in a similar social cultural milieu;
(ii) first preference shall be given to the extended family of the child, which does not include child’s
biological or adoptive parents;
Provided that any of the immediate or extended family members are not the alleged accused/perpetrators
of abuse on the child.
(iii) second Preference shall be given to an unrelated family known to the child.
(iv) third Preference shall be given to an unrelated foster family.
(v) fourth Preference shall be given to Group Foster Care.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (3), after the words “shall be taken by the Committee”, the words “within a period of three
months.” shall be inserted;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 81
(iii) after sub-rule (9), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(9A) The District Child Protection Unit shall submit the Home Study Report of the Prospective Foster Care
Family to the Committee within thirty days from the day of reference. ”;
(iv) for sub-rule (11), the following sub rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(11) The number of children placed under foster care shall not exceed two children at any given point of time
(with the exception of siblings) excluding biological children of the foster family and the number of children
under group foster care shall not exceed eight children including biological children of the foster caregiver at
any given point of time.”;
(v) for sub-rule (13), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(13) The District Child Protection Unit, while selecting Group foster care setting shall consider the following
illustrative criteria, namely:-
(i) the Group Foster Care setting shall be registered under rule 21A of these rules and the inspections of the
Group Foster Care setting shall be conducted as per provisions laid under these rules;
(ii) the Group Foster Care setting having registration under rule 21A of these rules shall follow the norms
and standards as given under the Act and these rules and the norms and standards as laid down under
these Rules shall be applicable as per children placed in Group Foster Care, which is a maximum number
of eight children including biological children of the foster caregiver;
(iii) existence of child protection policy;
(iv) sufficient space and proper amenities for children;
(v) any facility housing more than eight children including biological children in Group foster care shall be
registered as a Child Care Institution; and
(vi) medical reports of all the members of the Group Foster Caregivers residing in the premises shall be
obtained including reports for Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Tuberculosis and Hepatitis B and the like
to determine that they are medically fit.”.
(vi) for sub-rule (14), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(14) The Central Government shall issue Model Guidelines for non-institutional care including Foster Care
and Group foster care, based on which the process for selection of Foster Care and Group foster care setting
shall be notified by the State Government.”.
(vii) after sub-rule (19), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(20) The foster family or group foster care shall be black listed from the foster care programme and shall also
not be eligible to adopt a child under the Act:
(i) if the foster family or persons in group foster care are convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude,
and such conviction has not been reversed or has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;
(ii) if a complaint, of child abuse or violation of human rights or child rights, registered against the foster
family or persons in group foster care has been proven by the State Government, based on an inquiry.
Explanation: For the purpose of this rule, a blacklisted foster family or group foster family shall not be eligible
to apply for foster care.”.
19. In the principal rules, in rule 24,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), for clause (iii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–
“(iii) community or organisation sponsorship;”;
(ii) in sub-rule (1), after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(vi) sponsorship through institutions, companies or corporations either public or private;
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, sponsorship shall be prioritised for providing support to families
for the purpose of restoration of the child to the family or relative or guardian.”;
(iii) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) The District Magistrate shall draw up a sponsorship plan for the district in consultation with the
stakeholders, generate resources by way of public and private contributions and ensure that the vulnerable
children in the district are supported either partially or fully, as per their requirement. ”;
(iv) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2A) The District Child Protection Unit shall prepare a panel of persons or families or organisations interested
in sponsoring a child.”;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(v) after sub-rule (3), the following sub-rules shall be substituted, namely:–
“(4) The District Child Protection Unit shall forward the panel to the Board or the Committee or the Children’s
Court, for passing appropriate order for placement of the child under sponsorship in Form 36.
(5) The District Child Protection Unit, in case of individual sponsorship, shall open an account in the name of
the child to be operated preferably by the mother and the money shall be transferred directly from the bank
account of the District Child Protection Unit to the bank account of the child.
(6) The duration of sponsorship should be as per the Individual Care Plan of the child, which may cover a
period up to the age of eighteen years and may also be extended to the aftercare program of the child.”.
(vi) after sub- rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7) The procedure for sponsorship through institutions, organisations, companies or corporations either public
or private shall be as specified by the State Government.”
20. In the principal rules, in rule 25,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), for the words “The State Government shall”, the words “The State Government through the
District Magistrate shall” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rules shall be inserted namely:–
“(2A) The District Magistrate may facilitate scholarships for higher education; loan for education or starting
small business for children leaving the Child Care Institutions and convergence with the Government schemes
or private entrepreneurs may be explored for the purpose.
(2B) The District Magistrate may facilitate campus placements and apprenticeship assignments in
collaboration with the local businesses and industry, subject to the condition that such business or industry or
agency is found suitable for engaging with the children and prescribes to the Child Protection Policy as
mandated under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2020.
(2C) The District Magistrate may maintain oversight on such arrangements with the help of the Police and
other stakeholders to ensure that the interest of children are not compromised in any manner.”.
21. In the principal rules, in rule 27,–
(i) in sub-rule (8), for the words “shall be sent to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit and District
Child Protection Unit”, the words “shall be sent to the District Magistrate, the District Child Protection Unit,
the Children’s Court and the Special Juvenile Police Unit” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-rule (9), for the words “the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit, the District Child Protection
Unit and the State Child Protection Society.” the words “the District Magistrate, the District Child Protection
Unit, the Children’s Court, the Special Juvenile Police Unit and the State Child Protection Society” shall be
substituted;
(iii) in sub-rule (10), the words “(viii) group foster care” shall be omitted.
22. In the principal rules, in rule 28,–
(i) in sub-rule (5), for the words “shall be sent to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit and District
Child Protection Unit”, the words “shall be sent to the District Magistrate, the District Child Protection Unit,
the Children’s Court and Special Juvenile Police Unit” shall be substituted.;
(ii) in sub-rule (6), for the words “be sent to the Special Juvenile Police Unit, the District Child Protection Unit and
the State Child Protection Society.” the words “be sent to the District Magistrate, District Child Protection
Unit, Special Juvenile Police Unit and the State Child Protection Society” shall be substituted.
23. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (8) of rule 33, after sub-clause (g) of clause (iv), the following sub-clause shall
be inserted, namely:-
“(h) Birthday of any of the children in the Child Care Institution.”.
24. In the principal rules, in rule 34, –
(i) in sub-rule (3), after clause (v), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(v a) periodic medical health screening of each child to be conducted with the help of the nearest Government
healthcare facilities; ”;
(ii) in sub-rule (3), in clause (xii), after the words “to an appropriate centre administered by qualified persons”, the
words “or running under any Government Scheme of the Ministry or Department” shall be inserted;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 83
(iii) in sub-rule (6), for the words “The State Government through the District Child Protection Unit of the
District”, the words “The District Magistrate through the Chief or District Medical Officer” shall be
substituted;
(iv) after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) The State Government may be approached in the event of inadequate facilities in the District and the
concerned State Government shall make necessary arrangements in all such cases.”.
25. In the principal rules, in rule 35,–
(i) in sub-rule (2), for the words “shall participate in facilitating”, the words “shall be provided necessary training
or capacity building so as to facilitate” shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (4), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“The facilities available under the concerned mental health programme at State or District Level under the
Ministry or Department of Health shall be utilized for providing facilities for mental health to the children.”.
26. In the principal rules, in rule 37,–
(i) in sub-rule (4), after the words “shall be submitted to”, the words “the District Magistrate,” shall be inserted;
(ii) after sub-rule (4), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5) The District Magistrate may ensure convergence with existing Central or State Government programmes
for skilling and vocational training of the children.
(6) Every child aged fourteen and above living in a Child Care Institution or under non-institutional care may
be given the option of skill development and vocational training.”.
27. In the principal rules, in rule 39, after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) The District Child Protection Unit shall compile the recommendations of the Management Committees
and suggestions of the children received from the Suggestion Box from all Child Care Institutions in the
Districts on a monthly basis, action taken on the same and submit a detailed report to the District Magistrate.”.
28. In the principal rules, in rule 41,–
(i) for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(1) The State Government shall constitute the State level inspection committee and the District Magistrate
shall constitute district level inspection committees.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (6), for the words “shall forward the same to the State Child Protection Society or the District Child
Protection Unit”, the words “shall forward the same to the District Magistrate and the State Child Protection
Society” shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(6A) The Inspection report of the State Inspection Committee shall be forwarded to the District Magistrate
within a period of two weeks of the visit.”;
(iv) after sub-rule (7), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7A) Appropriate action shall be taken within a month by the District Magistrate and a compliance report for
the same shall be submitted to the State Child Protection Society, in two months period.”;
(v) for sub-rule (8), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely: –
“(8) The District Inspection Committee shall comprise of the following members, namely:–
(i) Additional District Magistrate- Chairperson;
(ii) Member of the Board or the Committee;
(iii) District Child Protection Officer as the Member Secretary;
(iv) one Medical Officer nominated by the Chief or District Medical Officer of the district;
(v) one member of the civil society working in the area of child rights, care, protection and welfare, who is
not a part of the management or organisation or has any pecuniary interest in such organisation of any
Child Care Institution
(vi) one mental health expert who has experience of working with children; and
(vii) any other person of repute from society not having conflict of interest, deemed appropriate by the
District Magistrate.”

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(vi) in sub-rule (11), for the words “to the District Child Protection Unit”, the words “to the District Magistrate”
shall be substituted;
(vii) for sub-rule (13), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(13) The District Magistrate shall take necessary action on the report of the District Inspection Committee and
ensure corrective measures are taken in a time bound manner.”
(viii) after sub-rule (13), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(14) The District Magistrate shall submit a report on the Child Care Institutions functioning in the District
and measures taken for their improvement once every year to the State Government.”.
29. In the principal rules, in rule 43,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), after the words “and cases pending for decision to the Authority online”, the words “on a
monthly basis” shall be inserted;
(ii) after sub-rule (1), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(2) The information to be provided in sub-rule (1) shall also be provided to the District Magistrate in Form
16A.
(3) The District Magistrate after review of the report submitted by the Child Welfare Committee in Form
16A shall take necessary measures to expedite the process of adoption of children declared legally free for
adoption.”.
30. In the principal rules, in rule 44, in sub-rule (1),–
(i) for clause (ii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
“(ii) Every child who does not get a family either in in-country adoption or in inter-country adoption and is
placed under the hard to place category, shall be eligible to be placed in foster care, by the Committee on the
recommendation of the District Child Protection Unit or the Specialised Adoption Agency. ”;
(ii) clauses (iii) and (iv) shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause (v),–
(a) for the words “a minimum of five years”, the words “a minimum of two years” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “after registering in Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System”, the
words “after registering in the portal of the Authority” shall be substituted.
31. In the principal rules, in rule 45,–
(i) for the marginal heading, “Procedure before the Court”, the marginal heading, “Procedure before the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (1), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(1) The procedure for obtaining an Adoption Order from the District Magistrate or the Additional District
Magistrate (authorized by the District Magistrate), as the case may be, shall be such as provided in Adoption
Regulations.”;
(iii) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) The District Magistrate, for the purpose of an application for adoption order, shall follow the procedure
as laid down in the Act and the Adoption Regulations.”;
(iv) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(3) All the cases pertaining to adoption matters pending before the Court shall stand transferred to the
District Magistrate from the date of commencement of these rules.”.
32. In the principal rules, in rule 46,–
(i) for sub-rule (1) the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(1) The District Magistrate or the Additional District Magistrate (authorised by the District Magistrate), as the
case may be, shall dispose of an application for making an adoption order within a period of two months from
the date of filing of the application, as provided under sub-section (2) of section 61 of the Act.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (2), for the words “No information or Court order”, the words “No information or Adoption order
issued by the District Magistrate” shall be substituted.
33. In the principal rules, in rule 49, in sub-rule (1),–

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 85
(i) in clause (vii), after the words “guidance to State Adoption Resource Agencies,”, the words “the District
Magistrate,” shall be inserted.
(ii) in clause (viii), for the words “State Governments and the State Adoption Resource Agencies,”, the words
“State Governments, the State Adoption Resource Agencies and the District Magistrate,” shall be substituted.
(iii) in clause (ix), in sub-clause (b), the words “and child care institutions” shall be omitted.
(iv) for clause (xi) the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:-
“(xi) maintain a comprehensive centralised database and portal relating to children and prospective adoptive
parents for the purpose of adoption;”.
34. In the principal rules, in rule 50,–
(i) in sub-rule (4), in clause (ii), for the words “the Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance
System”, the words “the centralised database and portal relating to children and prospective adoptive parents
for the purpose of adoption;” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-rule (8), for the words “from the National Legal Services Authority.”, the words “from the Department
of Legal Affairs and the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice.” shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-rule (15), for the words, letters and figures, “sitting fee of Rs.1,000/- per sitting,” the words “sitting
fee of not less than Rupees Two Thousand per sitting,” shall be substituted.
35. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (2) of rule 51, after the words “may also be convened”, the words “by video
conference, through web or” shall be inserted.
36. In the principal rules, in rule 54,–
(i) in sub-rule (1), the words “childline services” shall be omitted;
(ii) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5A) The State Government shall take appropriate action on the recommendations of the Committee or the Board,
as the case may be.
(5B) The District Child Protection Unit shall ensure transfer of children at the earliest, under intimation to the State
Government.”.
37. In the principal rules, after sub-rule (3) of rule 55, the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(4) Relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force
shall be applicable for offences under section 75 of the Act.”.
38. In the principal rules, after rule 55, the following rule shall be inserted, namely: –
“55A – Procedure in case of offence under section 76 of the Act–
(1) Whenever a child is found to be employed or used for the purposes of begging, an immediate investigation
shall be undertaken by the Police in such cases and where an offence is made out under section 76 of the Act, a
First Information Report shall be registered forthwith.
(2) In case where the parents have engaged their children in begging, then an investigation shall be undertaken
under section 76 of the Act prior to filing of First Information Report.
(3) In case the child engaged in begging is found to be a victim of trafficking then provisions of the Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) and section 370 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), which are
cognizable offences, shall also be applicable.
(4) In case the child engaged in child begging is found to be a victim of child labour then provisions of the Child
and Adolescent Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (61 of 1986), which are cognizable offences,
shall also be applicable.
(5) In case the child engaged in begging, is also found to be kidnapped for the purposes of begging then
offences under sections 359 to 369 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), which is a cognizable offence shall
also be applicable.”.
39. In the principal rules, after rule 57, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:-
“57A – Procedure in case of offence under section 79 of the Act–
(1) Whenever a child is found to be employed as a child labour, an immediate investigation shall be undertaken
by the Police in such cases and where an offence is made out under section 79 of the Act, a First Information
Report shall be registered forthwith.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) In case the child is found to be a victim of child labour then provisions of the Child and Adolescent Labour
(Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 (61 of 1986), which are cognizable offences, shall also be applicable.
(3) In case the child engaged as child labour is found be a victim of trafficking then provisions of the Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) and section 370 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860), which are
cognizable offences, shall also be applicable.”.
40. In the principal rules, in rule 59,–
(i) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely :–
“(5A) The Committee shall submit a report regarding such children and action taken regarding their
rehabilitation to the District Magistrate. The District Magistrate shall ensure action regarding shifting of
children to a safe place and closure of the Institution within seven days and recommend cancellation of
registration of the agency to the State Government.”;
(ii) in sub-rule (6),–
(a) for the words “The Committee shall recommend” the words “The District Magistrate shall recommend”
shall be substituted;
(b) after the words “shall also be withdrawn.”, the words “and the State Government shall take appropriate
action within fifteen days.” shall be inserted;
(iii) after sub-rule (6), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(7) In case the child that is sold and is also trafficked, then the provisions of the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) and section 370 of the Indian Penal Code, 1960 (45 of 1860) shall also
be applicable.”.
41. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (9) of rule 60, for the words “the State Government”, the words “the District
Magistrate” shall be substituted.
42. In the principal rules, in rule 61, after clause (xxxii) of sub-rule (3), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely,–
“(xxxiii) check the Children’s Suggestion or Complaint Book daily and inform the District Child Protection
Unit and the Committee or the Board promptly about urgent complaints.
(xxxiv) maintain a record of complaints received in the Children’s Suggestion or Complaint Book and actions
taken thereto”.
43. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (2) of rule 68, in clause (v), after the words “the State Government”, the words
“or the District Magistrate” shall be inserted.
44. In the principal rules, in rule 69, under sub-heading K, after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted,
namely:–
“(3) The children shall be educated about their rights and the Child Care Institution may encourage the children
and indulge them in education, sports and other extra-curricular activities.”.
45. In the principal rules, in rule 73, in clause (xxi) of sub- rule (3), the words “social investigation report, order of
the Committee, linkage with schemes” shall be inserted in the beginning.
46. In the principal rules, in rule 75, in sub- rule (1)–
(i) in clause (ii), after the words “Board or Committee”, the words “and the District Magistrate, National or
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
(ii) in clause (iii), after the words “Board or Committee”, the words “and the District Magistrate, the National or
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
(iii) in clause (iv), after the words “report the matter to the police”, the words “and the District Magistrate,
National or State Commission for Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be” shall be inserted;
47. In the principal rules, in rule 76, after clause (ii) of sub- rule (2), the following sub- clause shall be inserted,
namely:–
“(iia) in the event a case of sexual abuse is reported, procedure under section 19 of the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012), shall be followed”;
48. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (1) of rule 77, in the Table, against the serial number 6, in column (2), for the
entry, “Children’s Suggestion Book”, the entry “Children’s Suggestion or Complaint Book” shall be substituted.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 87
49. In the principal rules, in rule 79,–
(i) in sub- rule (8), the word “girl” shall be omitted, and after the words “Where a child”, the words, “under
eighteen years of age” shall be inserted.
(ii) after sub- rule (8), the following sub- rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(9) Where a girl, above eighteen years of age, is released from the Child Care Institution and has no place to
go, she shall be provided with accomodation in the Working Women Hostels, or other such government
facilities, till the time some other suitable arrangement is made by her.”
50. In the principal rules, in rule 81,–
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “Transfer of Child”, the words “Transfer or Repatriation of Child”
shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-rule (5), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(5) Where the child is a national of another country, on the production of the child before the Board or the
Committee, the Board or the Committee shall inform the District Magistrate who shall initiate the process for
repatriation of the child immediately through the appropriate Department of the State Government and in
consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs, as the case may be.”;
(iii) after sub-rule (5), the following sub-rules shall be inserted, namely:–
“(5A) The District Magistrate shall prepare a list of children to be repatriated and furnish the same to the
Monitoring Authority (National Commission for Protection of Child Rights or State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be) as per the protocols.
(5B) The Monitoring Authority shall follow up with the concerned Government or Private Agencies for
getting the child repatriated.
(5C) The Monitoring Authority shall then submit a status report of the children who are to be repatriated to
the Central Government and the State Government, as the case may be on a quarterly basis.”.
51. In the principal rules, for rule 82, the following rules shall be substituted, namely:–
“82A. Restoration and Follow-up for children in conflict with law–
(1) The Board or the Children’s Court may make an order in Form 44 for the release of the child placed in a Child
Care Institution after hearing the child and his parents or guardian, and after satisfying itself as to the identity of the
persons claiming to be the parents or the guardian.
(2) While passing an order for restoration of the child, the Board or the Children’s Court shall take into account the
reports of the Probation Officer Worker or the designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or non-
governmental organisation, including report of a home visit prepared on the direction of the Board or the Children’s
Court in appropriate cases, and any other relevant document or report brought before the Board or the Children’s
Court.
(3) When a child expresses his unwillingness to be restored back to the family, the Board or the Children’s Court
shall interact with the child to find out the reasons for the same and record the same and the child shall not be
coerced or persuaded to go back to the family.
(4) The child would also not be restored back to the family where the parents or guardians refuse to accept the child
back and in all such cases, the Board or the Children’s Court shall provide alternative means for rehabilitation.
(5) The child may not be restored back to the family where the social investigation report prepared by the Probation
officer or designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or the Child Welfare Officer or the non-
governmental organisation establishes that restoration to family may not be in the interest of the child.
(6) The order of restoration shall include an individual care plan prepared by the Probation Officer or the
designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or the non-governmental organisation.
(7) The Board or the Children’s Court, while directing restoration of the child, may pass order for an escort in Form
45, where necessary.
(8) Besides police, the Board may seek collaboration with the District Child Protection Unit to accompany the child
back to the family for restoration.
(9) In case of girls, the child shall necessarily be accompanied by female escorts.
(10) The copy of the restoration order along with a copy of the order for escort shall be forwarded by the Board or
the Children’s Court to the District Child Protection Unit which shall provide funds for the restoration of the child,
including travel and other incidental expenses.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(11) A follow-up plan shall be prepared as part of the individual care plan by the Child Welfare Officer or the Case
Worker or the social worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(12) The follow-up report shall state the situation of the child post restoration and the measures necessary in order
to reduce further vulnerability of the child.
82B. Restoration and Follow-up for children in need of care and protection-
(1) The Committee may make an order in Form 44 for the release of the child placed in a Child Care Institution
after hearing the child and his parents or guardian, and after satisfying itself as to the identity of the persons
claiming to be the parents or the guardian.
(2) While passing an order for restoration of the child, the Committee shall take into account the reports of the
social worker or Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker or designated officer of the District Child Protection Unit or
non-governmental organisation, including report of a home visit prepared on the direction of the Committee in
appropriate cases, and any other relevant document or report brought before the Committee.
(3) When a child expresses his unwillingness to be restored back to the family, the Committee shall interact with
the child to find out the reasons for the same and record the same and the child shall not be coerced or persuaded to
go back to the family.
(4) Where the child refuses to go back to the family or the family refuses to take back the child due to reasons of
financial constraints, the District Magistrate shall explore all possibilities of providing all Central and State
sponsored schemes including sponsorship under section 45 of the Act, Juvenile Justice Fund under section 105 of
the Act, Corporate Social Responsibility funds or any other scheme to strengthen the family financially in the best
interest of the child.
Explanation: For the purpose of this sub-rule, financial capability of the family may be ascertained through any
income documents such as bank statement of past one year or Income Tax returns of the past three years or
property registration of the family or income certificate, whichever is available.
(5) The child would also not be restored back to the family where the parents or guardians refuse to accept the child
back and in all such cases, the Committee may provide alternative means for rehabilitation.
(6) The child may not be restored back to the family where the social investigation report prepared by the Child
Welfare Officer or the social worker or the Case Worker or the non-governmental organisation or designated
officer by the District Child Protection Unit or management of Child Care Institution, as the case may be,
establishes that restoration to family may not be in the interest of the child.
(7) The District Child Protection Unit shall submit the report regarding restoration plan for eligible children and its
implementation and the District Magistrate may facilitate restoration of children and intervene wherever required.
(8) The order of restoration shall include an individual care plan prepared by the social worker or the Child Welfare
Officer or the Case Worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(9) The Committee, while directing restoration of the child, may pass an order for an escort in Form 45, where
necessary.
(10) Besides police, the Committee may seek collaboration with the District Child Protection Unit to accompany
the child back to the family for restoration.
(11) In case of girls, the child shall necessarily be accompanied by female escorts.
(12) The copy of the restoration order along with a copy of the order for escort shall be forwarded by the
Committee to the District Child Protection Unit which shall provide funds for the restoration of the child, including
travel and other incidental expenses.
(13) Where the child has not been declared legally free for adoption, all efforts must be made to restore the child
with their guardian or relatives, if they are deemed to be fit by the Committee.
(14) The District Magistrate shall explore all possibilities to provide benefit under all Central and State sponsored
schemes including Sponsorship under section 45 of the Act and the Juvenile Justice Fund under section 105 of the
Act.
(15) A follow-up plan shall be prepared as part of the individual care plan by the Child Welfare Officer or the Case
Worker or the social worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(16) The follow-up report shall state the situation of the child post restoration and the measures necessary in order
to reduce further vulnerability of the child.”
52. In the principal rules, after sub-rule (6) of rule 83, the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 89
“(7) The District Magistrate may submit proposal to the State for seeking funds from the State Juvenile Justice
Fund for implementing projects for children in the District regarding any of the activities mentioned under this
rule.”
53. In the principal rules, in sub rule (1) of rule 84,–
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “The State Child Protection Society”, the words “shall only comprise
of the officials from the State Government and” shall be inserted.
(ii) in clause (iv) for the words “received from various District Child Protection Units” the words “received from
various District Magistrates” shall be substituted.
54. In the principal rules, after rule 84, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:-
“84A. State Adoption Resource Agency–
(1) The State Government shall set up a State Adoption Resource Agency for dealing with adoptions and related
matters in the State under the guidance of the Authority, as per the provisions of section 67 of the Act and the
Adoption Regulations.
(2) The Governing Body of the State Adoption Resource Agency shall be headed by the Principal Secretary or
the Secretary of the Department of the State Government.
(3) The Director of the Department of the State Government dealing with adoption shall be the Member
Secretary and Chief Executive Officer of the State Adoption Resource Agency.”.
55. In the principal rules, in rule 85,–
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely:-
“District Magistrate and District Child Protection Unit”;
(ii) in sub-rule (1),–
(a) for the opening portion, the following shall be substituted, namely:–
“The District Child Protection Unit shall function under the supervision of the District Magistrate and
shall perform following functions, namely:”;
(b) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted:–
“(ii a) make the social investigation report and the individual care plan for each child as directed by the
Board or the Committee.”;
(c) In clause (xxiii), after the words “the State Child Protection Society” the words “and the District
Magistrate” shall be inserted.;
(d) after clause (xxvii), the following clauses shall be inserted namely:–
“(xxviii) maintain a panel of social workers for assigning the work to be done by social workers under
the Act;
(xxix) ensure that rights of the child are displayed in schools, hospitals, government buildings and other
such places which are frequented by children.”.
(iii) for sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:–
“(2) The District Magistrate shall be the Nodal Officer in the district for the implementation of the Act and
the rules, and may designate any Additional District Magistrate of the District to discharge the duties under
the Act.”;
(iv) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rule shall be inserted, namely:–
“(3) The District Magistrate shall hold quarterly review meetings with relevant stakeholders including the
Police Department, the Education Department, the Health Department, the District Legal Services Authority,
to discuss issues related to children in the district.”.
56. In the principal rules, in rule 88,–
(i) in sub-rule (6), the words “or Committee as the case may be” shall be omitted;
(ii) sub-rules (14) to (16) shall be omitted.
57. In the principal rules, in sub-rule (4) of rule 89, after the words “The State Government”, the words “or the District
Administration” shall be inserted.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
58. In the principal rules, in rule 91, in sub-rule (1), after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–
“(ia) inspect the Child Care Institutions including the Specialised Adoption Agencies and maintain a record
of inspections conducted by the authorities".
59. In the principal rules, in rule 92,–
(i) in clause (xi) of sub-rule(4), the words “childline services” shall be omitted;
(ii) in sub-rule (7), for the word “develop”, the word “issue” shall be substituted.
60. In the principal rules, for the Form 7, the following Form shall be substituted, namely: –
“FORM 7
[Rules 11(3), 13(7)(vi), 13(8)(ii), 19(4), 19(17), 62(6)(vii), 62(6)(x) and 69 I (3)]
INDIVIDUAL CARE PLAN
Child in Conflict with Law or Child in Need of Care and Protection
(Tick whichever is applicable)
Name of Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer/Probation Officer…………….
Date of preparing the Individual Care Plan…………………………………………
Case/Profile No……………of 20………………............…
FIR No……………………………………………………….
Under Sections (Type of offence), applicable in case of Children in Conflict with Law…............…
Police Station…………………………………………………
Address of the Board or the Committee………………………………………………
Admission No. (If child is in an institution) …..………………….…….
Date of Admission (if child is in an institution …………………………………....
Stay of the child (Fill as applicable)
(i) Short term (up to six months)
(ii) Medium Term (six months to one year)
(iii) Long term (more than 1 year)
FOR BOTH CATEGORIES OF CHILDREN WHO ARE PLACED IN INSTITUTIONAL OR NON-
INSTITUTIONAL CARE
1. Personal details (to be provided by child/parent/both on admission of the child in the institution)
(a) Name of the Child…………………………………
(b) Age/Date of Birth………...........…………………
(c) Sex: Male/Female.................……………………
(d) Father’s name…………………………...………..
(e) Mother’s name…………………………..…………
(f) Nationality………………………………........…….
(g) Religion………………………………........……….
(h) Caste………………………………….........………
(i) Language spoken………………….........………..
2. Level of Education…………………………………..
3. Details of Savings Account of the child, if any…………………….……..
4. Details of awards/rewards received by the child, if any…………………
5. Details of child’s belongings, if any………………………..………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 91
6. Details of child’s parents’ property, if any-
7. Details of child’s parents bank accounts, if any-
8. Details of child’s insurance policy, if any-
9. Details of child’s parents’ insurance policy, if any-
10. Details of child’s parents job compensation, pension if any-
11. Details of child’s fixed deposits, savings, financial policy, mutual funds if any-
12. Details of parent’s loans, Mortgages, other financial liabilities, if any-
13. Details of property to be inherited, if any-
14. Whether succession certificate issued or not?- a. yes b. no
15. Details of succession certificate-
16. Whether legal heir certificate issued or not?- a. yes b. no
17. Details of legal heir certificate-
18. Whether the child is orphan/abandoned/surrendered?
19. Based on the results of Case History, Social Investigation report and interaction with the child, give
details on following areas of concern and interventions required, if any- (This is for both categories
of children who are placed in institutional or non-institutional care)
S. No Category Areas of concern Proposed
Interventions
1 Child’s expectation from
care and protection
2 Health and nutrition needs
3 Emotional and psychological
support needed
4 Educational and training
needs
5 Leisure, creativity and play
6 Attachments and inter-
personal relationships
7 Self-care and life skill
training for protection
from all kinds of abuse,
neglect and maltreatment
8 Independent living skills
9 Any other significant
experiences which may have
impacted the development of
the child, like trafficking,
domestic violence, parental
neglect, bullying in school,
etc. (Please specify)
20. Whether the child has any siblings? Yes/No
21. Whether the child and his/her sibling are being placed together? A. Yes B. No
22. Whether the child and his/her siblings are being surrendered by the single parent/ Guardian? A. Yes
b. No C. Not Applicable
23. Case/Profile No. of the sibling/siblings-

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
24. In case the child is with disability or special needs or is terminally ill
(This may be relevant for both child in conflict with law and child in need of care and protection, as the
case may be)
(i) Whether the child who is suffering from disabilities have been provided with disability certificate.
Yes/No. If Yes, please state the disability certificate no ………...............
(ii) Whether such child has been provided with medical equipment like hearing aid, crutches etc.
Yes/No. If Yes, please specify……………………
(iii) Whether the child has been provided for compensation /relief for his/her disability. Yes/No. If yes,
please specify……………………………
(iv) Education requirements of the child…………………………………..
(v) Any other special needs of the child……………………………….
(vi) Any other recommendation………………………………………
25. If the child belongs to Children in Street Situations/Trafficked/Involved in Drug Peddling/Child
Labour(This may be relevant for both child in conflict with law and child in need of care and protection, as the
case may be)
(i) Whether the child belongs to Children in Street Situation: Yes/No.
(ii) Whether the child is a victim of child trafficking: Yes/No. If yes,
(iii) Whether the child was involved in drug- peddling: Yes/No.
(iv) Whether the child is a victim of child labour. Yes/No. If yes,
(v) Whether the child who has been a victim of Child-Labour has been provided compensation
under the Child Labour Rehabilitation-cum-Welfare Fund or any other scheme. Please
Specify………………………………………….
(vi) Whether such child who have been victim of child labour/ child trafficking/drug peddling/
or is a children in street situation provided with counselling? Yes/No
(vii) Whether the child has been provided any compensation? Yes/ No. If yes, please
specify…………………………
26. If the child is a victim of abuse including sexual abuse: (This may be relevant for both child in conflict
with law and child in need of care and protection, as the case may be)
(i) Whether the child has been provided counselling?............................
(ii) Whether any action has been taken against such offender/perpetrator? If Yes, Please
specify………………………………………….
(iii) Whether the child who has been a victim of sexual assault has been provided compensation as per
the compensation scheme under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012……………………………….
(iv) Any other compensation or relief provided to the child?......................
(v) Any other observations……………………………………
FOR CHILDREN PLACED IN INSTITUTIONAL CARE
27. Progress report of the child (to be prepared every fortnight for first three months and thereafter to be
prepared once a month)
[Note: Use different sheet for Progress Report]
1. Name of the Probation Officer/Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer………….
2. Period of the report……………………………………...……………………….
3. Admission No……………………………………………...…………………….
4. Board or Committee details.......…………………………………………………
5. Profile No…………………………….………………......………………………
6. Name of the Child……………………..……………..…………………………..
7. Place of interview ………………....……..Dates………......…....……………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 93
8. General conduct and progress of the child during the period of the report ………………………………
………………………………………………………………..…….………………………………………………
…….............…………………
9. Progress made with regard to proposed interventions as mentioned in point 19 of Part A of this form.
S.No Category Proposed Progress of the Child
Interventions
1. Child’s expectation from care and
protection
2. Health and nutrition needs
3. Emotional and psychological
support needed
4. Educational and training needs
5. Leisure, creativity and play
6. Attachments and inter-personal
relationships
7. Self-care and life skill training for
protection
from all kinds of abuse, neglect and
maltreatment
8. Independent living skills
9. Any other significant experiences
which may have impacted the
development of the child, like
trafficking, domestic violence,
parental neglect, bullying in school,
etc. (Please specify)
10. Any proceeding held before the committee or Board or Children’s Court, details:-
11. Variation of conditions of bond:........................................
12. Change of residence of the child:.....................................
13. Other matters, if any:............................................................
14. Period of supervision completed. Details:…………………………………
15. Result of supervision with remarks (if any):………………………………….
16. Name and Addresses of the parent or guardian or fit person under whose care the child is to live after the
supervision is over:……………………………
Date of report:…………………
Signature of the Probation Officer…………………..
28. Pre-release report (to be prepared 15 days prior to release):
1. Details of place of transfer and authority concerned responsible in the place of transfer/release:............
....................................................................................
2. Details of placement of the child in different institutions/family:.................................
3. Training undergone and skills acquired:........................................................
4. Last progress report of the child (to be attached, refer Part B)
5. Rehabilitation and restoration plan of the child (to be prepared with reference to progress reports of the
child.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
S. No Category Rehabilitation and Restoration
plan of the child
1. Child’s expectation from care and protection
2. Health and nutrition
3. Emotional and psychological
4. Educational and Training
5. Leisure, creativity and play
6. Attachments and Inter-personal Relationships
8. Self-care and life skill training for Protection
from
all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment
9. Independent living skills
10. Any other
6. Date of release/transfer/repatriation:………………………………………….
7. Requisition for escort if required:…………………………………………….
8. Identification Proof of escort such as driving license, Aadhaar Card, etc:……
9. Recommended rehabilitation plan including possible placements/sponsorships…
10. Details of Probation Officer/Non-Governmental Organization for post-release follow
up:………………………………………………………………
11. Memorandum of Understanding with Non-Governmental Organisation identified for post-release follow-
up (Attach a copy)
12. Details of sponsorship agency/individual sponsor, if any:…………………
13. Memorandum of Understanding between the sponsoring agency and individual sponsor (Attach a
copy):…………………………
14. Medical examination report before release:……………………………………
15. Any other information:…………………………………………………………
29. Post-release/restoration report of the child:
1. Status of Bank Account: Closed/Transferred
2. Earnings and belongings of the child: handed over to the child or his parents/guardians – Yes/No
3. First interaction report of the Probation Officer/Child Welfare Officer/Case Worker/social worker/Non-
Governmental Organisation identified for follow-up with the child post-release:………………………………
4. Progress made with reference to Rehabilitation and Restoration Plan:………
5. Family’s behaviour/attitude towards the child:……………………….
6. Social milieu of the child, particularly attitude of neighbours’ / community:……….
7. How is the child using the skills acquired:……………………………………
8. Whether the child has been admitted to a school or vocation? Give date and name of the school/institute/any
other agency Yes/No ……….
9. Report of second and third follow-up interaction with the child after two months and six months
respectively:…………………………………………..
10. Efforts towards social mainstreaming and child’s opinion/views about it:..……
11. Identity Cards and Compensation

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 95
IDENTITY CARDS Present status (Please tick whichever
Applicable)
Yes No Action taken
Birth Certificate
School certificate
Caste certificate
Below Poverty Line Card
Disability Certificate
Immunization card
Ration Card
Adhaar Card
Received compensation
from Government
[Instruction: Please verify with the physical document]
30. Adoption
(i) Whether the child has been declared legally free for adoption?
A. Yes B. No C. Not Applicable
(If not applicable, then subsequent questions do not apply)
(ii) Whether the child has been placed in a Specialised Adoption Agency or Child Care Institution?
A. Specialised Adoption Agency B. Child Care Institution
(iii) Social Investigation Report by Child Welfare Officer/Case worker/social worker, as the case may be
submitted?
A. Yes B. No
(iv) Deed of surrender executed by the parents/guardian before the Committee?
A. Yes B. No C. Not Applicable
(v) Declaration submitted by District Child Protection Unit and Child Care Institution or Specialised
Adoption Agency that all restoration efforts have been made for the child-
A. Yes B. No
(vi) Nobody has approached District Child Protection Unit and Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption
Agency for claiming the child as biological parents or legal guardians-
A. Yes B. No
(vii) All timelines under Section 38 of the Act have been adhered to before declaring the child legally free for
adoption-
A. Yes B. No
FOR CHILDREN PLACED IN NON-INSTITUTIONAL CARE (EXCEPT ADOPTION)
1. Guardian’s name (if applicable)
2. Parents/Guardian’s Nationality…………………........…….
3. Parents/Guardian’s Religion……………………....……….
4. Child’s nationality-
5. Details of Adhaar card/voter Identity Card/pan card of the child…………………..
6. Details of Adhaar card/voter Identity Card /pan card of the child’s parents………
7. Caste………………………………….........………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
8. Language spoken………………….........………..
9. Level of Education…………………………………………………………..
10. Whether the child has been provided compensation/relief under various schemes of government………..
11. Where is the child being placed? –
(a) guardian (b)foster care (c) sponsorship (d) single parent
12. Whether the child is being surrendered by the single parent/Guardian?
A. Yes B. No C. Not Applicable
13. If yes, then whether the surrender deed has been made? A. Yes B. No
14. Education- (Yes/No/Not applicable) If yes, then
(i) Whether the child has been enrolled in school or a special training center? ……
(ii) If child is enrolled in school, then
(a) Name of the school……
(b) Government/Private ……
(c) Class ………………..
(iii) Unified District Information System for Education Code of the said school……………………….
(iv) If child is enrolled in special training centre then,
(a) Center is Residential or Non-Residential……………….
(b) Duration of enrollment ……………
(v) Whether the child has been enrolled in school under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Right
to Education Act, 2009? Yes / No / NA
(vi) The Child Welfare Committee has recommended for continuing of education of the child in the same
school as the child was studying in? Yes / No
(vii) On the basis of the recommendation, whether the child is continuing education in the same school as he
was studying in? Yes/ No
(viii) The Child Welfare Committee has recommended for transfer of school for the child? Yes / No
(a) If yes, then what are the reasons given by the Child Welfare Committee for recommending transfer
of school? .......................................................
(ix) Whether the child has been admitted to/transferred to a new school? Yes/ No
(x) Details of new school along with its Unified District Information System for Education
Code………………….
(xi) Address and Contact Details……………………………………………….
(xii) Class in which admission/transfer taken place……………………………….
(xiii) Class in which the child was transferred from previous school…………
(xiv) On the basis of the recommendations of Child Welfare Committee, whether the school in which the child
is studying in is giving the benefit under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 12(1)(c) of the Right to
Education Act, 2009 to the child? Yes / No
(xv) Whether the child is being given free education by the appropriate government? Yes / No
(xvi) Is the child availing any scholarship? Yes / No
a. If yes, name of the scholarship ………………………………..
b. Amount of scholarship …………………………………………
(xvii) Any other observation and recommendation made by the Child Welfare Committee for education of the
child………………………………………….
15. Sponsorship
(i) The child has been recommended for sponsorship by the Child Welfare Committee?
A. Yes B. No (If no, then subsequent questions do not apply)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 97
(ii) Whether sponsorship for the child has been approved by a Committee headed by District Magistrate:
A. Yes B. No
(iii) Nature of sponsorship: i. Government ……… ii. Private ……………
(iv) Type of sponsorship
(a) Individual to Individual sponsorship
(b) Group Sponsorship
(c) Community or organisation sponsorship
(d) Support to families through sponsorship
(e) Support to children homes and special homes
(f) Sponsorship through:
i. Institutions,
ii. Companies
iii. Corporations either public or private
(g) Any other
(v) Whether child has started receiving money under the sponsorship program-
A. Yes B. No
(vi) Recommended duration of sponsorship:.....................................
(vii) Any other information:........................................
16. Restoration of the child:
(i) Whether the child is being restored to:-
Single Parent / Biological Parents / Guardian/ Relative
(ii) Name of the person to whom the child is being restored to……………..
(iii) Address and contact details of person where the child is being restored to……
(iv) If the child is being restored to Guardian/relative, then-
(v) Relationship of the child with the guardian/relative-
(vi) Does the guardian/relative have children of their own? A. yes B. No
(vii) If yes, Details of guardian/relatives’ children-
(viii) Social and financial condition of the guardian/relative-
(ix) Whether the child will be staying in the same State where the child was found? Yes/No
(x) Whether the child needs to be transferred to another State for restoration? Yes/No. If yes:
(a) Name of the State where the child is restored to-
(b) An escort is required for transfer of the child to another State?
A. Yes B. No.
If yes: Identification Proof of escort such as driving license, Aadhar Card, etc…………
(c) Whether District Child Protection Unit/ Child Welfare Committee of the concerned district of the
State where the child is being transferred to has been informed about the transfer orders? Yes/No
(d) Whether the child’s documents/Social Investigation Report/ Individual Care Plan/ Orders of
Child Welfare Committee have been transferred to the concerned CWC of the State? Yes/No
(e) Details of Child Welfare Committee where the case is transferred……………………..
(xi) Child Welfare Committee has recommended follow-up of the child post restoration: Yes / No
(xii) Status of bank accounts of the child…………………………………..
(xiii) The belongings of the child are handed over to the child/parent/guardian: Yes/No
(xiv) Identity Cards and Compensation:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
IDENTITY CARDS Present status (Please
tick whichever is
applicable)
Yes No Action taken
Birth Certificate
School certificate
Caste certificate
Below Poverty Line Card
Disability Certificate
Immunization card
Ration Card
Adhaar Card
Received compensation from
Government
REPATRIATION OF THE CHILD
(i) Whether the child needs to be repatriated. Yes/No
(ii) If yes, whether such repatriation is: (tick whichever is applicable)
inter-district
inter-state
inter-country
(iii) Whether information about repatriation of the child has been informed to the:-
District Magistrate.
State Government.
Central Government.
(iv) Has the process of repatriation of the child been initiated? Yes / No . Details:........
(v) Whether the details of the child to be repatriated has been informed to National or State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights, as the case may be?
(vi) Any other recommendation……………………………….
…………………………………………
Signature of the Probation Officer/
Child Welfare Officer/District Child Protection Unit
Stamp and Seal where available”
61. In the principal rules, for Form 16, the following Form shall be substituted, namely: –
“FORM 16
[Rules17(1)(v), 17(1)(v a), and 20(2)]
QUARTERLY REPORT BY CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
District
Quarterly Report for the period: From……………to…………..
Details of Child Welfare Committee:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 99
Sl. Details Date of Appointment Training attended
No.
1. Chairperson
2. Member 1
3. Member 2
4. Member 3
5. Member 4
Details of Cases with Child Welfare Committee:
Sl. Number of Number of Number of Number of Reasons for
No. cases at the Cases received cases cases pending pendency
beginning of during the disposed of at the end of
quarter quarter during the quarter
quarter
Final Order
Total number of final orders passed during the quarter
Released Trans Ordere Repatri Declared Ordered Recommen Initiated
to fer d ated Legally for ded Process of
parent/ To to To free for Foster to the compensati
guardian other stay in Foreign adoption care/ Juvenile on
/fit person/ Child Child Country sponsorshi Justice to child,
fit Welfa Care p Board if eligible
institution re Institut /Aftercare For filing
Com ion FIR
mittee
Details of the case regarding Restored children by Child Welfare Committee:
S. No. of children Restored No. of No. of children No. of children
children restored with fit restored and
No
restored person recommended
with for follow up
Same Different Different guardian relative
parents
District District State s
Details of the cases of Death of Child in Child Care Institution:
S. No. Name of the Cause of death Name of Child Period of
deceased child Care Institution stay in
the child was Child Care
placed Institution

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
100 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Details of the cases of Runaway children:
S. No. Name of the Name of Child FIR No. Background of the
runaway child Care Institution, child
the child was
placed
VISIT TO HOMES BY CHAIRPERSON/ MEMBERS
Date of visit:.........................................
Name and Address of Home visited:...............................
Remarks/ Suggestions of the Committee:…………….
Signature of Chairperson
Seal.”
62. In the principal rules, after Form 16, the following Form shall be inserted, namely:–
“FORM 16 A
[Rule 43(2) and (3)]
MONTHLY REPORT BY CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
District
Monthly Report for the period: From……………to…………..
DETAILS OF THE CASE PERTAINING TO LEGALLY FREE FOR ADOPTION
Break-up of Pendency before Child Welfare Committee
Orphan Abandoned Surrendered Total
Children for Children Children for Children > 2 Children 0-18 years
0-2 > 2 years 0-2 years and <18
and <18 years
years
Pending for > Pending Pending for > Pending for > Pending for > 2
2 months for > 4 2 months 4 months months
months
M F M F M F M F M F
Signature of Chairperson
Seal”
63. In the principal rules, for Form 22, the following Form shall be substituted, namely: –
“FORM 22
[Rule 19(8)]
SOCIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
(Tick whichever is applicable)
1. Sl. No……………………….
2. Produced before the Child Welfare Committee…………………..
3. Case No………………………………………
4. Social Investigation Report Prepared by: District Child Protection Unit/ Social Worker/ Case Worker/ Person
in charge of Home/ representative of Non- Governmental Organization

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 101
5. Details of child in need of care and protection:
(i) Name…………………………………………………….
(ii) Age……………………………….. DD/MM/YY ………………………………..
(iii) Gender…………………………………………………………….
(iv) Caste: (tick as applicable)
General
Scheduled Caste
Scheduled Tribe
Other Backward Class
Others, specify………
Not Known ……………..
(v) Religion……………………………………………………………
(vi) Father’s Name……………………………………………………
(vii) Mother’s Name ………………………………………………
(viii) Guardian’s Name………………………………………..
(ix) Permanent Address……………………………………….
(x) Landmark of the address………………………………
(xi) Address of last residence ……………………………
(xii) Contact information father/mother/family member/guardian…………
(xiii) Whether the child needs an interpreter/translator: Yes/ No
(xiv) Whether the child is- Orphan / Abandoned / Surrendered / Others
(xv) Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any………………
(xvi) Family Details: (YES/NO) If yes, then:
S.N. Name and Age Sex Educati Occupation Income Health History of Addiction
Relations on Status
Mental
hip
Illness
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
(xvii) Relationship among family members:
Father and mother Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Father and child Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Mother and child Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Father and siblings Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Mother and siblings Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Child and siblings Cordial/Non cordial/Not known
Child and relative Cordial/Non cordial/Not known

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
102 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
6. With whom was the child staying prior to production before the Committee:
(tick as applicable)
Parent(s) – Mother / Father / Both
Siblings / Blood relative
Guardian(s) – Relationship
Friends
On the street
Night shelter
Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
Child Care Institution:
Children’s home
Shelter home
Specialised Adoption Agency
Fit Facility
Other (please specify)……………………………..
7. In case of orphan and abandoned child-
(i) Where was the child found? ……………………………….
(ii) What steps are being taken to trace the biological parents/relatives of the child? Please specify….
(iii) If the biological roots of the child are known, reasons for death of both parents of the
child…………………………..
8. Whether the child needs to be repatriated: Yes/No. If yes:
Inter- district repatriation
Inter- state repatriation
Inter- country repatriation
9. Whether child is eligible for the benefit of sponsorship: Yes/No
10. Whether the child is eligible for any scheme or entitlement.
Yes/No (If Yes, lease specify) …………………
11. Whether child has received any kind of compensation in regard to the demise of any parent: Yes/No; Please
Specify………………..…
12. Whether child should get benefit under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section of Section 12 of the Right to
Education Act, 2009: Yes / No
13. Financial support recommended for the child:
(i) Whether the child’s parents had any property/FD/Cash/Insurance/bank accounts prior to their sudden
demise: Yes/No; Details thereof……………
(ii) Whether the child’s parents have any loans, mortgages, financial liabilities?
A. Yes B. No. Details thereof……………………………………………
(iii) Whether the child’s parents have any collateral against that mortgage?
A. Yes B. No. Details thereof………………………………………………….
(iv) Whether the child’s parents have any family business?
A. yes B. no. Details thereof….
(v) Whether the child has acquired any right/share in the property (self-acquired/ancestral) from the deceased
parent: Yes/No; Details thereof…………….
14. Details of education of the child:
(i) Whether the child has received education: Yes/No

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 103
(ii) If yes, specify education up to which class…………………
(iii) If the child is enrolled in school, then name of the school-…………….
(iv) Whether the school of the child is registered on Unified District Information System for Education, if Yes,
state Unified District Information System for Education Code…………………
(v) Type of school- Government/ Private.
(vi) Whether the child has been enrolled in special training centre. Yes/No. If Yes specify duration of
enrolment of child in Special Training center……………………………………
(vii) Whether the Special Training Center was Residential/Non- Residential
(viii) The reason for leaving School (tick as applicable)
Failure in the class last studied
Lack of interest in the school activities
Indifferent attitude of the teachers
Peer group influence
To earn and support the family
Sudden demise of parents
Bullying in school
Rigid school atmosphere
Absenteeism followed by running away from school
There is no appropriate level of school nearby
Abuse in school
Humiliation in school
Corporal punishment
Medium of instruction
Others (please specify)………………………………………………
(ix) Attitude of class mates towards the child (If applicable) ………………
(x) Attitude of teachers and classmates towards the child (If Applicable) ………
(xi) Vocational Training (if any)…………………………………….
15. Other factors of importance if any………………………………………….
16. Habits of the child: (tick as applicable)
Watching TV/movies
Playing indoor/outdoor games
Reading books
Drawing/painting/acting/singing
Religious activities
Begging
Gambling
Alcohol consumption
Smoking
Drug use, if yes, specify………………………….
Any other, please specify………………………………
17. Extra-curricular interests……………………………………………………..
18. Outstanding characteristics and personality traits…………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
104 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
19. Majority of the friends are (tick as applicable)
Educated
The same age group
Older in age
Younger in age
Male
Female
Addicts
Children in conflict with law
20. If child is friends with adults, please specify…………………………
21. Attitude of the child towards friends………………………………………..
22. Attitude of friends towards the child………………………………………….
23. Observation about neighbourhood (to assess the influence of neighbourhood on the child)……………….
24. Whether the child has any addiction- YES / NO, if yes, specify……………..
25. In case the child is with disability or special needs or is terminally ill
(If Yes, Specify):
A. Health status of the child
(i) Respiratory disorders - present / not known / absent
(ii) Hearing impairment - present / not known / absent
(iii) Eye diseases- present / not known / absent
(iv) Dental disease- present / not known / absent
(v) Cardiac diseases- present / not known / absent
(vi) Skin disease-present / not known / absent
(vii) Sexually transmitted diseases- present / not known / absent
(viii) Neurological disorders- present / not known / absent
(ix) Mental handicap- present / not known / absent
(x) Physical handicap- present / not known / absent
(xi) Urinary tract infections –present / not known / absent
(xii) Others (please specify)………………..
B. Whether the child is differently abled- Yes or No, if yes, specify-
(a) Hearing Impairment
(b) Speech Impairment
(c) Physical disability
(d) Mental disability
(e) Locomotive disability
(f) Others (please specify)……………………….
C. Whether the child has a valid disability certificate. (If Yes, provide details)
D. Mental condition of the child: (Present and past)…………………….
E. Physical condition of the child: (Present and past)………………
F. Whether the child needs special education- Yes/No. If yes, specify:
G. Special education already included in the current school curriculum: Yes/No/Not Applicable
H. Whether the Child requires or has been using any medical equipment. (If yes, please specify) ……………
I. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any……

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 105
J. Whether the child is receiving any pension under disability schemes. Yes/No (If yes then specify)
……………….
K. Any other remark/observation…………………………………
26. In case the child belongs to Children in Street Situations/Trafficked/Involved in Drug Peddling/Child
Labour:
A. Whether the child belongs to any of the category under Children in Street Situations: Yes/No. If yes,
specify:
(i) Children without support living on the streets all alone
(ii) Children stay on the streets in the day and are back home in the night with their families who reside in a
nearby slum/hutments.
(iii) Children living on the streets with their families:
B. With whom was the child staying prior to production before the Committee:
(i) Parent – Mother / Father / Both
(ii) Siblings / Blood relative
(iii) Guardian – Relationship
(iv) Friends
(v) On the street
(vi) Night shelter
(vii) Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
(viii) Other (please specify)……………………………
C. If there is history/ tendency of the child to run away from home.
Yes/ No. If yes:........................
(i) What is the parents’ attitude towards discipline in the home and child’s reaction…….
(ii) Reasons for leaving the family:
(a) Abuse by parent(s)/guardian(s)/step parents(s)
(b) In search of employment
(c) Peer group influence
(d) Incapacitation of parents
(e) Criminal record of parents
(f) Separation of Parents
(g) Demise of parents
(h) Poverty
(i) Others (please specify)…………………
D. Where was the child found, please specify ……….
E. Whether the child has been used for begging: Yes/No
F. Whether the child has been involved in rag-picking: Yes/No
G. Whether the child is used by any gangs or adults or group of adults or has been used for drug peddling:
Yes/No
H. Whether the child has been bought or sold or procured or trafficked for any purpose: Yes/No, if yes:
I. Whether the child was trafficked with knowledge of parents: Yes/No
J. Whether the child was sold by the parents/relatives: Yes/No
If yes, then whether any action has been taken against the parents/relative: Yes/No
K. Whether the child was employed as a labour: Yes/No, if yes:
(i) Industry in which the child was employed…………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
106 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ii) Whether the child has faced exploitation at work : Yes/No
(a) Extracted work without payment
(b) Little or low wages with longer duration of work
(c) Others (Please specify)……………..
(iii) Details of income utilization…………………..
(iv) Any occupational hazard faced by the child: Yes/No. If yes, specify………….
(v) Whether case filed against employer: Yes/No. If yes, specify case detail……….
(vi) Compensation provided to the child:
(a) Interim
(b) Final
(c) Child Labour Rehabilitation cum Welfare Fund
L. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any…………
M. Whether temporary shelter has been provided to child: Yes/No
N. Has any plan been made for rehabilitation of the child, specify……………….
O. Any other remarks/observation………………………………………
27. In case the child has faced any kind of abuse, including sexual abuse, or has been a victim of any
offence:
A. Whether the child is a victim of any offence: Yes/No
B. Types of abuse faced by the child:
(a) Verbal abuse– parents/siblings/ employers/others (please specify)…....…
(b) Physical abuse- parents/siblings/ Employers/others (please specify)…....…
(c) Sexual abuse by- (tick as applicable)
relatives through blood
relatives through adoption
relatives through marriage
relatives through guardianship
persons in foster care
person living in the same or shared household
any person in the ownership, or management, or staff, of any institution providing services to a
child
any person in position of trust or authority
Others (please specify)
(d) Others– parents/siblings/ employers/others (please specify)…………
C. Types of ill- treatment met by the child:
(i) Denial of food– parents/siblings employers/other (please specify)…….
(ii) Beaten mercilessly– parents/ Siblings/employers/other (please specify)
(iii) Causing injury– parents/ siblings/employers/other (please specify)……
(iv) Detention- parents/ siblings/employers/other (please specify)…………
(v) Any other (please specify)………………..
D. In case of sexual abuse:
(i) Relationship with the perpetrator……………………
(ii) Gender of the perpetrator……………………
(iii) Age of the perpetrator……………..
(iv) How the child came in contact with the perpetrator……………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 107
(v) Any other child from the same place who is abused / harassed / taken / sent by the perpetrator….
(vi) Whether any other person/s were involved in the offence…………………
(vii) Whether any compensation has been recommended to the child under the Protection of Children
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012: Yes/No.
If any other, please specify…………………………………..
E. Case/FIR registered by the police: Yes/No. If yes, specify Case No./ FIR No.……….……………..
F. Whether the child has been a victim of cyber-bullying: Yes/No. If yes:
(i) Cyber bullied while using internet system at home
(ii) Cyber bullied while using internet system in school
(iii) Cyber- bullied while attending school classes from home
G. Has the child been counselled: Yes/No, if yes, provide details…………….
H. Any other remark/observations…………………………
I. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any………………
28. In case the child is victim of child marriage or is married:
A. Name of the spouse…………………………….
B. Age of the spouse……………………………….
C. Date of marriage (DD/MM/YY)………………………………..
D. Place of marriage……………………..
E. Reasons for conducting marriage of the child…………………….
F. People who were involved in getting the marriage of the child conducted- i. Parents ii. Relatives iii. Others.
G. If others, please specify…………………..
H. Whether any case has been registered by police: Yes/No.
If yes, provide details…………………………..
I. If any action taken, details thereof………………………
J. Any other remarks/observation…………………………..
29. Whether the child needs to be repatriated: Yes/No. If yes: (tick as applicable)
(i) Inter- district repatriation
(ii) Inter- state repatriation
(iii) Inter- country repatriation
OBSERVATIONS OF INQUIRY
30. Emotional factors…………………………………
31. Physical condition……………………………………
32. Social and economic factors…………………………….
33. Suggestive causes of the problems………………………
34. Analysis of the case, including reasons/contributing factors for the offence…
35. Reasons for child’s need for care and protection……………… ………..
36. Opinion of experts consulted…………………………………..
37. Mental Health Expert assessment………………….
38. Risk analysis for the child to be restored to the surviving parent/relatives/guardian……………….
39. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any…......
40. Recommendation of District Child Protection Unit/Case Worker/Social Worker regarding psychological
support, rehabilitation and reintegration of the child and suggested plan……………………………..
Signature
(of the person assigned)
*****”

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
108 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
64. In the principal rules, in Form 27, in serial number (1), after item (iii), the following item shall be inserted,
namely:-
“(iii a) Darpan ID No. ...........”.
65. In the principal rules, in Form 39, in the heading, the words “INCLUDING GROUP FOSTER CARE” shall be
omitted.
66. In the principal rules, for Form 46, the following Form shall be substituted namely:–
“FORM 46
[Rule 21(10), 41(3) and 41(9)]
INSPECTION OF CHILD CARE INSTITUTIONS
(Fill as applicable)
Date and time of visit:
Name of the officials inspecting the Home :
1. ………….
2. ………….
3. ……………
Name and address of Institution:
Type of Facility:_____________________(Children Home/Observation Home/Special Home/Place of
Safety/Open Shelter/Specialised Adoption Agency/Fit Facility)
If aided/supported: by State Government, Name of Department:………………
If run by Government:………………..
Name of Person-in-charge: …………..
Contact No. ………………….
E-mail ID: ……………………….
Indicator Status Remarks Acts/Rules
(Yes or No) (In case of No
Compliance or
Partial Compliance)
LEGAL STATUS
Registration of the Parent Organization Section 41/Rule
under the Societies Registration Act 21: Registration of
1860/The Indian Trusts Act 1882/The the Child Care
Companies Act 2013 Institutions
Registration No. of the Parent
Organization under the Societies
Registration Act 1860/The Indian Trusts
Act 1882/The Companies Act 2013
Registration of the Parent Organization
under the Juvenile Justice(Care &
Protection) Act 2015
Registration No. of the Parent
Organization under the Juvenile
Justice(Care & Protection) Act 2015
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act
2010, Registration (if any)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 109
FUNCTIONING
Sanctioned capacity (in numbers)
Total number of Children placed in the Rule 18 and 19:
Institution Production before
a Committee and
Number of Children living in the Home
Inquiry
without the order of the Child Welfare
Committee/ Juvenile Justice Board
Are there children in the age group of 0-5
years staying there?
(Specify number)
Are there children above 18 years staying
there?
(Specify number)
No. of new admissions in the current
month
(Specify number)
No. of children who have moved
out/released
(Specify number)
No. of children referred by Child Welfare
Committee/ Juvenile Justice Board during
the month.
(Specify number)
No. of children produced before Child
Welfare Committee/ Juvenile Justice
Board during the month.
(Specify number)
No. of children as on last day of the
previous month.
(Specify number)
No. of children with special needs, if yes,
give details.
(Specify number)
Total number of children present in the Section 41:
Institution are less than its capacity or as Registration of
per its capacity Child Care
Institutions
Number of children residing for more Observation
than 04 months Home/Special
Home/Place of
Safety
Management Committee Rule 39:
Management
Average Number of meetings conducted
Committee
in a year
(Specify number)
Children’s Committees constituted Rule 40:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
110 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Average Number of meetings conducted Children’s
in a year (Specify number) Committees
Adoption Committee constituted Section 65:
Average Number of meetings conducted Specialised
in a year (Specify number) Adoption Agency
Open Shelter/Shelter Home has any other Open Shelter
activity apart from psycho-social
rehabilitation of children for a short
period of time
Information regarding the children is
uploaded on a portal, as specified by the
Central Government.
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Building ( Rented or owned)
Sign board displayed indicating name,
type of Child Care Institution, contact
details
Education (Class room)
Dormitories
Rule 29: Physical
Kitchen Infrastructure
Counseling
Recreation with television
Sick room
Library
Visitors’ room
Vocational training
Dining hall
Store
Record room
Office room
Staff Residence
Bathrooms
Toilets
Computer with internet
Boundary wall/fencing
Separate living area for children below 10
years
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY
Records stored safely
Essential Details including- Emergency
Numbers

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 111
Duty Chart
Rule 26:
Menu Chart
Management and
Attendance Status Monitoring of
Child Care
Weekly Programme Schedule
Institutions
Safe transport facility for children
attaining education outside the campus
Separate facilities for children from staff
and management
Facilities and support (equipment, staff,
teaching and learning materials/aids) for
children with special needs
Visual needs
Intellectual needs
Hearing needs
Rooms and dormitories being free of
unstable heavy equipment, furniture, or
other items that children could pull down
on themselves
Good condition of ceilings walls, floor
coverings, draperies, curtains, blinds,
furniture, fixtures, and equipment
Clear guidelines regarding access of
staff/visitors in identified areas especially
in children’s dormitories/toilets
Walls and compound painted with Specialised
attractive paints/cartoons/pictures etc. Adoption Agency
A cradle has been placed near the outside
gate or not
Infants, toddlers and older children are
segregated or not
Restrictions on entry in the infants and
toddler areas
Freedom of movement of mobile infants
and toddlers in a safe area
Privacy maintained in toilets and bathing Rule 67: Security
areas or not Measures
Basic emergency medical care equipment
available or not
Special emergency medical care
equipment available or not
Child friendly bathrooms / bathing areas Rule 31: Sanitation
(1:10) available exclusively for children and Hygiene
or not.
(Specify number)
Child friendly toilets (1:7) available
exclusively for children or not
(Specify number)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
112 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Safe and purified drinking water storage
is available or not
Safe and purified drinking water is
provided to all children or not
Proper drainage and garbage disposal
facilities available or not
STAFF
One Person- in-Charge
Two Counselor
Three Child Welfare Officer/ probation
officer/Case workers
Four House Mother/ House Father Rule 26:
Management and
One Medical Officer (Physician)
Monitoring of
Child Care
One Para medical staff
Institutions
One Store keeper cum accountant
One (part time) Art and Craft cum music
teacher
One (part time) PT instructor cum Yoga
Trainer
One Driver
Two Cook
Two Helper
Two House Keeping
Security Guard
Any Other
Whether personal files of each staff are
available including-
Records of Recruitment
Reference Check
Work Profile
Performance Appraisal
Female Superintendent / Manager /In-
Charge available for girls’ unit
TRAINING OF STAFF
Training organised for the staff viz: Rule 89: Training
of Personnel
Social Workers
Dealing with
Child Welfare Officers Children
Case Workers
rehabilitation cum placement Officers
care givers
House Fathers and House Mothers

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 113
Security personnel and other staff
The staff of the Child Care Institution has
been given refresher trainings or not
Rehabilitation-cum-Placement Officer Rule 65:
Rehabilitation-
cum-Placement
Officer
Superintendent/Manager/ In-charge stay Rule 61: Duties of
on the campus the Officer-in-
charge of a Child
Care Institution
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
Enough/safe toys are available and Rule 38:
accessible to children or not Recreational
Facilities
Enough suitably equipped outdoor space
for play is available and accessible to
children or not
Availability of Baby Care Unit with
special emergency medical care
equipment (MCE) or not
Availability of safe toys for infants and
toddlers to stimulate their healthy
development or not
Individual beds are available and
provided to children or not
Rule 29: Physical
Children segregated according to age Infrastructure
group for stay and activities or not
Children segregated according to gender
for stay and activities or not
Activities are conducted under staff Rule 34/35:
supervision to minimize the risk of injury Medical Care and
to children or respond as promptly as Mental Health
possible or not
Active supervision of children in
emotional distress (due to fear, trauma, or
illness) or not
PREVENTION AND PROTECTION FROM ABUSE
Rule 76: Abuse
and Exploitation of
Standard operating procedure for child
the child
protection
Standard operating procedure is adhered
to by staff and Management
Functional and accessible complaint and
grievance redressal mechanism including
for abuse prevention is in place, such as-
Suggestion Box
Child helpline
CCTV Cameras

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
114 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Children Committees
Regular Staff-Children Interface
Training and Orientation of children
Any complaint found in the Suggestion or
Complaint Book
DAILY ROUTINE
Daily routine of activity is followed Rule 32: Daily
Routine
Daily routine is drawn up in consultation
with the children’s committee or as per
the need
Daily routine is on public display at
prominent places in the institution
NUTRITION
Staff is aware of the nutritional Rule 33: Nutrition
requirement of children at varying stages and Diet Scale
of development
Meals are planned in consultation with
children
Meals are provided in accordance with
prescribed norms/diet scale
Birthdays of children are celebrated
Special meal is provided during
festivals/occasions
Special diet is provided to sick/special
health children, as per advice of Doctor
Home receives sponsored
cooked/uncooked food items, lunch,
dinner etc. from donors
Cooked food if sponsored is
tasted/checked by care giver before
serving
Ayah/caretakers are supervised by other
staff while babies are fed
CLOTHING, BEDDING HYGIENE
All children are provided individual, Rule 30: Clothing,
clean, seasonal and age appropriate Bedding, Toiletries
clothes, articles and toiletries as per and other articles
norms
All children are provided individual,
clean, seasonally appropriate mats and
sleeping materials as per norms
Sleeping material is cleaned /sanitized Rule 31: Sanitation
regularly or before reuse as needed and Hygiene
Rooms are regularly fumigated,
disinfected and material provided to each
child for prevention of infection and
disease

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 115
Each child has been allocated a secured
space to store personal belongings
Old articles like clothes, bed sheets, mats,
bedding, etc. if donated, are cleaned/
disinfected before use
Whether following facilities available in
Home for children:
Fans
Coolers
Air Conditioner
Heaters for Winter
HEALTH CARE
Every child undergoes a health check-up Rule 34/35:
on admission Medical Care/
Mental Health
Every child has regular health checkups
Every child has health card and the
records/files are maintained and updated
Nurse/paramedical staff is available in the
home at night
Medicines are administered to the child
by a staff/ nurse
Staff is trained to provide First Aid
Mandatory Immunization is done of
children up to 6 years of age
EDUCATION
Educational assessment is conducted and Rule 36/69:
need of every child addressed Education/
Institutional
All children are provided with age
Management of
appropriate formal education
Children
Enough emphasis on stimulating infants
to learn through a play way learning
process
Age appropriate, feasible and market
oriented vocational training is provided
Rule 37:
Children are consulted in selecting Vocational
vocational training being provided to Training
them
Age appropriate life skill education is
provided
RECREATION
Indoor recreation facilities are available Rule 38:
for children Recreational
Facilities
Outdoor recreation facilities are available
for children

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
116 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Staff engage with children in such
recreation activities
Any innovative activities to develop
cooperation/ participation, resilience, etc.
are harnessed
ADMISSION AND REPORTING
All children admitted to the Home are Section 31/ Rule
produced before the Child Welfare 18: Production
Committee within the prescribed time before Committee
limit
All children in the Home are housed in
compliance with the Child Welfare
Committee orders
All children admitted to the Home are Section 10/Rule 9:
produced before the Juvenile Justice
Production before
Board within the prescribed limit
a Board
All children in the Observation Home
Special Home/Place of Safety are housed
in compliance with the Juvenile Justice
Board Orders
Every child is restored through the Child
Welfare Committee or the Juvenile
Justice Board
The case history of each child is
submitted before the Child Welfare
Committee within the stipulated time
period as directed
The Home has made efforts to trace the Rule19 / 69:
biological family/guardian of the child Inquiry/
Institutional
Home submits any report of its own Management of
efforts to trace biological families to the Children
Child Welfare Committee
INDIVIDUAL CASE RECORD
Individual Care Plan is prepared for every
Child
If yes, Individual Care Plan is prepared
for every child is being implemented
A professional Social Worker or
experienced personal has prepared the
Individual Care Plan (ICP) for every child
ICP has been prepared for children in the
Home within 30 days of admission of the
child
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
Home maintains a master admission Rule 77:
register Maintenance of
Registers
Home updates the master admission
register in Track Child
Home updates the master admission
register in centralised database and portal

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 117
relating to children and prospective
adoptive parents for the purpose of
adoption
Number of children present tallies with
the attendance register as on date
Monthly data about children is sent to Rule 22: Open
State Adoption Resource Agency/ District Shelter
Child Protection Unit as the case may be
Documentary proof of restoration-
parent/guardian letter with identity proof
regarding the same is available
Whether details of legally free children
for adoption is maintained by the
institution
The Child Care Institution maintains
all the relevant information of the child
i.e. --
Individual case file with individual care
plan
Case History
Inquiry report
Child Welfare Committee Orders
Medical Examination Report (MER)
Child Study Report (CSR)
Home Study Report (HSR)
Birth Certificate
Court order
Quarterly Progress Report
Health report
Report of counselor or social worker, Rule 77:
social history/case history of each child is Maintenance of
available in the personal file Registers
Initial reports of interaction with the child
are on record
REGISTERS
Master Admission and discharge register
Supervision register
Case file of each child
Medical File and Medical Report
Attendance register of children and staff
Order Book
Inquiry report file
Children’s suggestion book/file

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
118 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Voucher, Cash Book, Ledger, Journal and
Annual Accounts
Grant utilization register
Stock register
Record of minutes of meetings of--
Management Committee
Complaints Committee
Staff-Children interaction
Staff-Meetings
Nutrition/diet register
Budget statement register
Visitors’ book
Staff movement register
Personal belonging register
Children’s movement register
IF A SPECIALISED ADOPTION AGENCY
There is a professional social worker/
experienced personnel available in the
agency for preparing Child Study Report
Formal Child Study Report of each child
is prepared after the child is declared free
for adoption by the Child Welfare
Committee
There is a professional social
worker/experienced personnel available
in the agency for preparing Home Study
Report
Medical Examination Report of each
child is prepared after the child is
declared free for adoption by the Child
Welfare Committee by a pediatrician
There was pendency of completion of
Home Study Report
There was pendency of completion of
Child Study Report
There was pendency of completion of
Medical Examination Report
All the reports are uploaded on
centralised database and portal relating to
children and prospective adoptive parents
for the purpose of adoption
ADOPTION RELATED
The agency expeditiously uploads Child
Study Report, Medical Examination
Report, as soon as children become
legally free for adoption

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 119
The decision for referral and matching of
each child is taken by the Adoption
Specialised
Committee
Adoption Agency
The agency prepares every adoptable
child psychologically for his or her
assimilation with the adoptive family and
the new surroundings
The agency has developed
leaflets/pamphlets/literature/ any other
publicity materials depicting the process
of adoption
Adoption register is maintained and
complete adoption file of each child
placed in adoption is available
Regular follow-ups of children placed in
adoption
The agency receives/maintains post
placement progress reports in respect of
children placed in in-country adoption
and inter-country adoption
All post-adoption records are kept in a
manner, which prevents accessibility of
larger public
The agency kept all the information and
documents as well as belongings of the
child in safe custody
There has been a plan how to preserve the
information and how to disseminate in
case the child comes for searching the
root
There has been any disruption occurred in
case of children placed in in-country
adoption
There has been any disruption occurred in
case of children placed in inter-country
adoption
The agency completes the Home Study
Report of all Prospective Adoptive
Parents registered, expeditiously and
within stipulated time frame
The agency places a child in pre-adoption
Foster Care on completion of assigning
and referral processes and after observing
necessary formalities as laid down in the
Guidelines
The agency receives Adoption fees as per
the Norms
The agency obtains appropriate
information from birth parent(s) before
surrender of the child
The agency gets the surrender deed
executed only in the presence of the Child
Welfare Committee

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
120 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
The agency explains the implications of
surrendering their child to the parents
including the possibility of adoption of
the child by foreigners and of no further
contact with him or her
The agency informs the parent(s) that
from the date of surrender they would get
a reconsideration period of sixty days
during which period they can take back
the child
The agency maintains the confidentiality
of the unwed mother and the biological
parents
The agency restores the child to the
biological parents after the
reconsideration period is over, if claimed
by the parents
The agency provides counselling to
Prospective Adoptive Parents and
children as and when required by them
The agency provides counselling to
Prospective Adoptive Parents before the
Home Study Report is prepared
The agency advices/encourages
Prospective Adoptive Parents to contact
Adoptive Parents Associations, adoptive
families and older adoptees to understand
the entire process of adoption
The agency counsels the adoptive parents,
not to change the name of an older child
so as to help the child keep his or her
identity
FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY
Details of information about the sources
of funding and that of the organisation as
whole or separately available
Sources of Funding-
Govt. aid/grant
National Donors
International Donors (FCRA)
Corporate Donors
Own sources
Others
Details of project wise Bank Account(s) Accounts and
maintained by it with A/c No, purpose, Audit
amount received including FCRA
Account available
The Home submits a copy of audited
accounts of organization with its audit
report and Annual Report within six
months from date of closing of financial
year, to State Government

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 121
The accounts are audited annually by an
authorized Chartered Accountant
The Home has provided copies of
Audited Statement of Accounts and
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act
2010, Returns for last 2 years to the
competent authority
Grants are released as per norm and time
taken for
The agency has provided information Specialised
about the details of child wise adoption Adoption Agency
charges received during last two years for
in-country and inter-country separately
The agency receives adoption charges
over and above the prescribed norms
The agency maintains financial records
including receiving and utilization of
adoption fee
The Home submits a copy of audited
accounts of organization with its audit
report and Annual Report within six
months from date of closing of financial
year, to State Government
The Adoption Agency utilizes funds
available in the form of Adoption fee in
accordance with the specified norms
The accounts are audited annually by an
authorized Chartered Accountant
INSPECTIONS
The Home has been inspected by the Rule 41:
Inspection Committee Inspection
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by the Inspection Committee
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the Section 30:
Child Welfare Committee Functions and
Responsibilities of
Feedback was provided on the inspection
Committee
by the Child Welfare Committee
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the Inspections
Juvenile Justice Committee of the High conducted by JJ
Court Committee and
Department of
Feedback was provided on the inspection
WCD
by the Juvenile Justice Committee of the
High Court
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the
appropriate authority of Department of
Women and Child Development

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
122 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by appropriate authority of Department of
Women and Child Development
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the Rule 91:
National Commissions for Protection of Monitoring by
Child rights National/State
Commission for
Feedback was provided on the inspection
Protection of Child
by the National Commissions for
Rights
Protection of Child rights
The feedback report is positive
The Home has been inspected by the
State Commissions for Protection of
Child rights
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by State Commissions for Protection of
Child rights
The feedback report is positive
Previously, Social audit has been
conducted of the Home and the report has
been positive
The Home has a copy of the inspection Rule 41:
recommendations and record of action Inspection
thereof
Any improvement has taken place based
on the Inspection Reports
PROGRAMMATIC LINKAGES
Medical care and Mental health services Rule 34: Medical
for children Care
Education Rule 36: Education
Vocational training Rule 37:
Vocational
Training
Life Skills, Art and Dance and Drama Rule 38:
therapy and Occupational therapy and Recreational
other issue-based workshops Facilities
Recreational activities including sports
Hobby classes
Health including speech/physiotherapy Rule 35: Mental
Health
Legal aid services Rule 39:
Management
Committee
De-addiction services Rule 27: Fit
Facility
With appropriate authorities for birth
registration, identity proof and reserved/
special category certificate

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 123
The Home has established linkages with
other Child Care Institution for
rehabilitation of children with special
needs
Restoration and Rehabilitation of children
and their linkage established with-
Child Welfare Committee
Juvenile Justice Board
Child Helpline
District Child Protection Unit
District Sponsorship & Foster Care
Approval Committee
Details of adoptable children have been
uploaded on centralised database and
Section 65:
portal relating to children and prospective
Specialized
adoptive parents for the purpose of
Adoption Agency
adoption
Specialised Adoption Agency is located
in the same premises
With appropriate authorities for birth
registration, identity proof and reserved/
special category certificate
Any other Institution is also located in the
same premises
Violations
1. Violation of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and the Rules
2. (a) Violation of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
(b) If yes, whether Section 19 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 was followed?
3. Any other Violation/Observation/Remarks: None.
Interaction with Children
During the Inspection, informal interaction with the children may be held with a group of children of appropriate age
group in an open friendly environment to find out about their safety, security and protection from offence in the
Institution. The interaction may focus on education, skilling, sports, co-curricular activities. The confidentiality of the
children also needs to be ensured.
1. General Principles to Conduct the Interaction
The following General Principles has to be followed throughout the conduct of Interaction:-
(i) Confidentiality
(ii) Transparency
(iii) Participation
Keep the questions simple and general. Show that you are genuinely interested in the child/children.
2. Rapport Building and generic Conversation- Begin the discussion with a general, open-ended question about
the topic such as asking about the views about the Home that the children are staying in. The inspecting
team/officials can ask the children about the positives and negatives of the Home.
3. Discussing general issues- The inspecting team/officials should ask general questions to the children to gain their
trust and confidence. The general questions can be focussed on issues with the administration and staff, issues
faced by children while staying in the Home, how helpful are the staff of the Home, measures for reporting a
complaint and information about child protection policy in the Home.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
124 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
4. OBSERVATIONS on the interaction-
______________________________________________________________________________________
5. If any case of child abuse is observed/suspected, then it should be immediately reported as per provisions of
Section 19 of the POCSO Act.
Observations/ Remarks: ...................................................................................
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature: Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:”
67. In the principal rules, after Form 46, the following Form shall be inserted, namely:–
“FORM 46A
[Rule 21(3) and Rule 21(15)]
INSPECTION FORMAT FOR REGISTERATION AND RENEWAL OF A CHILD CARE INSTITUTION
State:
District:
Name of Institution:
Educational facility:
Type of Facility:_____________________(Children Home/Observation Home/Special Home/Place of
Safety/Open Shelter/Specialised Adoption Agency/Fit Facility)
Name and address of the Institution: …………………………
Acts/Rules Indicator Status Remarks
(Yes or (In case of No
No) Compliance or
Partial
Compliance)
I. LEGAL STATUS
Registration of the Parent Organization
under the Societies Registration Act
Registration of the
1860/The Indian Trusts Act 1882/The
Child Care
Companies Act 2013
Institutions
Registration No. of the Parent Organization
under the Societies Registration Act
1860/The Indian Trusts Act 1882/The
Companies Act 2013
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010,
Registration (if any)
II.PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Sign board displayed indicating name, type
of CCI, contact details

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 125
Boundary wall/fencing
Rule 29: Physical
Classroom
Infrastructure
Dormitories
Kitchen
Counseling
Recreation
Sick room
Library
Visitors’ room
Vocational training
Dining hall
Store
Record room
Office room
Staff Residence
Bathrooms
Toilets
Good condition of ceilings walls, floor
coverings, draperies, curtains, blinds,
furniture, fixtures, and equipment
Child friendly bathrooms / bathing areas
(1:10) available exclusively for children
Child friendly toilets (1:7) available
exclusively for children
Rule 31: Sanitation
and Hygiene Safe and purified drinking water storage is
available
Safe and purified drinking water is provided
to all children
Proper drainage and garbage disposal
facilities available
Clear guidelines regarding access of
staff/visitors in identified areas especially in
children’s dormitories/toilets
III. MANAGEMENT/ STAFFING PATTERN
1 Person in Charge
2 Counselor
3 Child Welfare Officer/ probation
Rule 26: officer/Case workers
Management and
4 House Mother/ House Father
Monitoring of Child
Care Institutions 1 Medical Officer (Physician)
1 Para medical staff
1 Store keeper cum accountant

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
126 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
1 (part time) Art and Craft cum music
teacher
1 (part time) PT instructor cum Yoga
Trainer
1 Driver
2 Cook
2 Helper
2 House Keeping
Security Guard
Any Other
Female Superintendent / Manager /In-
Charge available for girls’ unit
Rule 89: Training Training organized for the staff on - Child
of Personnel Rights Protection
Dealing with
Care Giving
Children
Rehabilitation
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015
Mission Vatsalya
Rule 76: Abuse and Training and Orientation of care givers
Exploitation of the
Training and Orientation of children
child
Rule 65: Rehabilitation-cum-Placement Officer
Rehabilitation-cum-
Placement Officer
Rule 61: Duties of Superintendent/Manager/ In-charge stay on
the Person-in- the campus
charge of a Child
Care Institution
IV. FUNCTIONALITY
Computer with internet accessibility
Records stored safely
Essential Details including- Emergency
Numbers
Duty Chart
Rule 29: Physical
Infrastructure Menu Chart
Attendance Status
Weekly Programme Schedule
Safe transport facility for children attaining
education outside the campus
Separate facilities for children from staff and
management
Facilities and support (equipment, staff,
teaching and learning materials/aids) for
children with special needs

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 127
visual needs
Intellectual needs
hearing needs
others
Rooms and dormitories is free of unstable
heavy equipment, furniture, or other items
that children could pull down on themselves
Privacy maintained in toilets and bathing
areas
Rule 67: Security
Measures Basic emergency medical care equipment
available
Special emergency medical care equipment
available
V. PREVENTION AND PROTECTION FROM ABUSE
Standard operating procedure for child
protection
Functional and accessible complaint and
grievance redressal mechanism including for
abuse prevention is in place, such as-
Rule 76: Abuse and Suggestion Box
Exploitation of the
child Child Helpline
CCTV Cameras
Children Committees
Regular Staff-Children Interface
VI. DAILY ROUTINE AND FACILITIES
Rule 32: Daily Daily routine is drawn up in consultation
Routine with the children’s committee and/or with
children’s participation or as per the need
Daily routine is on public display at
prominent places in the institution
Enough/safe toys are available and
accessible to children
Rule 38:
Recreational Enough suitably equipped outdoor space for
Facilities play is available and accessible to children
VII. NUTRITION AND RECREATION
Rule 33: Nutrition Staff is aware of the nutritional requirement
and Diet Scale of children at varying stages of development
Indoor recreation facilities are available for
children
Rule 38:
Recreational
Outdoor recreation facilities are available for
Facilities
children
Any innovative activities to develop
cooperation/ participation, resilience, etc. are
harnessed

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
128 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
VIII. CLOTHING, BEDDING HYGIENE
Rule 30: Clothing, clean, seasonal and age appropriate clothes,
Bedding, Toiletries articles and toiletries as per norms are
and other articles available
clean, seasonally appropriate mats and
sleeping materials as per norms are
available
Rule 31: Sanitation Sleeping material is cleaned /sanitized
and Hygiene regularly or before reuse as needed
Rooms are regularly fumigated, disinfected
and material provided to each child for
prevention of infection and disease
secured space to store personal belongings
is available for each child
Whether following facilities available in
Home for children:
Fans
Coolers
Air Conditioner
Heaters for Winter
IX. HEALTH CARE
Rule 34/35: Medical Nurse/paramedical staff is available in the
Care/ Mental Health Home at night
Staff is trained to provide First Aid
X. EDUCATION
Rule 36/69: To provide age appropriate education option
Education is available
Rule 37: Vocational Option for age appropriate, feasible and
Training market oriented is available
XI. RECORD MAINTENANCE
Master Admission and discharge register
Supervision register
Medical File and Medical Report
Attendance register of children and staff
Rule 77:
Maintenance of Order Book
Registers
Inquiry report file
Children’s suggestion book/file
Voucher, Cash Book, Ledger, Journal and
Annual Accounts
Grant utilization register
Stock register
Nutrition/diet register

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 129
Budget statement register
Visitors’ book
Staff movement register
Personal belonging register
Children’s movement register
XII. FINANCIAL TRANSPARENCY
Details of information about the sources of
funding and that of the organisation as
whole/ separately available
Sources of Funding- Government
aid/grant
National Donors
International Donors under the
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act 2010
Corporate Donors
Own sources
Others
Rule 53: Accounts Details of project wise Bank Account(s)
and audit of the maintained by it with A/c No, purpose,
Authority amount received including FCRA Account
available
I. RECOMMENDATION BY DISTRICT MAGISTRATE FOR REGISTRATION -
1. Details of violations or discrepancies or not as per norms observed:–
2. The district already has ________No. of Child Care Institutions (viz.,_______Children Home,
___________Observation Home, ___________Shelter Home, ____________Special Home, _ _Special
Adoption Agency) and _________ Juvenile Justice Boards, ______ Child Welfare Committees,
_________District Inspection Committees and has /does not have (tick as applicable) a requirement for
additional Child Care Institution.
3. In view of the above, the said Child Care Institution is recommended for consideration for
registration/renewal of registration.
OR
In view of the above, the said Child Care Institution is not recommended for consideration for registration /
renewal of registration. (whichever is applicable)
Sign and Stamp
(Name)
District Magistrate
District __________
State ____________
Date _____________
****”

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
130 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
68. In the principal rules, after Form 46, the following Forms shall be inserted, namely: –
“Form 47
[Rule 21A(5), (8) and (9)]
INSPECTION FORM FOR GROUP FOSTER CARE
(Fill as applicable)
Date and time of visit:
Name and designation of the officials inspecting the Home :
1. ………….
2. ………….
3. ……………
Name and address of Group Foster Care:
Name of Foster Parents: …………..
Contact No. ………………….
E-mail ID: ……………………….
Indicator Status Remarks
(Yes or No) (In case of No
Compliance or
Partial Compliance)
LEGAL STATUS
Previous registration of the facility as a Rule 21A:
Group Foster Care Registration of the
Child Care
Duration of previous registration
Institutions
Whether the registration of Group Foster If yes, specify reason
Care was cancelled at any time
Mandatory police verification of each of
the individuals has been done or not
STATUS OF CHILDREN
Sanction capacity (in numbers)
Total number of Children placed in
Institution
Number of biological children
Number of children placed under foster
care by the Child Welfare Committee
Number of children placed under foster
care without the orders of the Child
Welfare Committee
Number of siblings placed in the foster
care
Are there children in the age group of 0-5
years staying there?
(Specify number)
No. of new placements in the current
month
No. of children who have moved out in
the current month, including:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 131
No. of children restored to family
No. of children moved in CCI
No. of children given in adoption
Number of children with special needs
placed in the foster care
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
Building ( Rented or owned) Rule 29: Physical
Infrastructure
Number of rooms are sufficient for
sanctioned capacity of children
Kitchen, available or not
Recreation with television
Number of Bathrooms are sufficient for
sanctioned capacity of children
Individual beds are available and
provided to children
Children segregated according to age
group for stay
Children segregated according to gender
for stay
INFRASTRUCTURAL FACILITY Rule 26:
Management and
Whether rooms are free of unstable heavy
Monitoring of
equipment, furniture, or other items that
Child Care
could harm children, or not
Institutions
Whether good condition of ceilings walls,
floor coverings, draperies, curtains,
blinds, furniture, fixtures, and equipment
Privacy maintained in toilets and bathing Rule 67: Security
areas or not Measures
Basic emergency medical care equipment
available or not
Special emergency medical care
equipment available or not
CHILD CARE FACILITIES
Enough/safe toys are available and Rule 38:
accessible to children or not Recreational
Facilities
Enough suitably equipped outdoor space
for play is available and accessible to
children or not
PREVENTION AND PROTECTION FROM ABUSE
Whether Standard operating procedure Rule 23: Foster
for child protection is in place or not Care
Whether restricting/restraining children’s
movements by binding, tying or any other
form, is practiced or not

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
132 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Whether food, rest or toilet is witheld or
not
Whether any previous cases of child
abuse, neglect, cruelty etc. reported
against the foster family or not (Give
Details)
NUTRITION
Whether Foster Family is aware of the Rule 33: Nutrition
nutritional requirement of children at and Diet Scale
varying stages of development or not
Whether meals are planned in
consultation with children or not
CLOTHING, BEDDING HYGIENE
Whether all children are provided Rule 30: Clothing,
individual, clean, seasonal and age Bedding, Toiletries
appropriate clothes, articles and toiletries and other articles
as per norms or not
Whether sleeping material is cleaned Rule 31: Sanitation
/sanitised regularly or before reuse as and Hygiene
needed or not
Rooms are regularly cleaned
Whether each child has been allocated a
secured space to store personal
belongings or not
HEALTH CARE
Whether Foster Family is trained to
provide First Aid or not
Whether Foster Family is aware of basic
medicines which would be required to be
administered to children in case of
sickness, emergencies or not
EDUCATION
Whether all children are provided with
age appropriate formal education or not
Whether all children are admitted in
school or not
Whether all children are attending and
going to school regularly or not
Whether Foster Family is able to help the
children with their education like
homework, projects, presentations or not
RECREATION
Whether indoor recreation facilities are Rule 38:
available for children or note Recreational
Facilities
Whether outdoor recreation facilities are
available for children or not

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 133
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
Group Foster Care maintains all the
relevant information of the child i.e. --
Individual case file
Social Investigation Report
Individual Care Plan
Case History
CWC Orders
Child Study Report (CSR)
Home Study Report (HSR)
Birth Certificate
Quarterly Progress Report
Health report
FINANCIAL COMPLIANCES
Details of information about the sources
of income of Foster Family is available
Foster Family has sufficient income to
provide for sanctioned capacity of foster
children
Other sources of funding
(Government/Private)
IT returns record of each of the
individuals for the last three years
INSPECTIONS
The Home has been inspected by the Rule 44:
Inspection Committee Inspection
Feedback was provided on the inspection
by the Inspection Committee
The feedback report is positive
The Home is being inspected by the Child
Welfare Committee every month
The Home has been inspected by the Section 109/Rule
National Commissions for Protection of 91: Monitoring by
Child rights/State Commissions for National/State
Protection of Child Rights Commission for
Protection of Child
Feedback was provided on the inspection
Rights
by the National Commissions for
Protection of Child rights/ State
Commissions for Protection of Child
rights
The feedback report is positive
Any improvement has taken place based
on the Inspection Reports

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
134 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
I. Violations
(a) Violation of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
If yes, whether Section 19 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 was followed:
(b) Any Other Violation/Observation/Remarks:
II. RECOMMENDATION BY DISTRICT MAGISTRATE FOR REGISTRATION
4. In view of the above, it is recommended that the said Group Foster Care is fit for providing
registration/renewal of registration and if not the case – not fit to provide registration/ renewal of registration.
Sign and Stamp
(Name)
District Magistrate
District __________
State ____________
Date_____________
FORM 48
[Rule 21(A)(7)]
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION OF GROUP FOSTER CARE
After perusal of the documents and on the basis of an inspection of the facility conducted on (date)............ the facility
is recognized as a Group Foster Care under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 with effect from..... for a period of .....years.
The Group Foster Care shall remain bound to follow the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015,
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016 and regulations framed by the appropriate
Government from time to time.
Dated this........................day of ........................20 .........................
(Signature)
(Seal)
Name and Designation……………………………………………
FORM 49
[RULE 15(4A)]
AFFIDAVIT BY THE PERSON APPLYING FOR CHAIRPERSON OR MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE
I ........................... applying for the position of Chairperson/Member of Child Welfare Committee
........................................, hereby certify that I am not barred by any of the conditions laid down in Section 27(4A) of
the Act, i.e.,
(i) I do not have any past record of violation of human rights or child rights,
(ii) I have not been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed or
has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence,
(iii) I have not been removed or dismissed from service of the Government of India or State Government or an
undertaking or corporation owned or controlled by the Government of India or State Government,
(iv) I have never indulged in child abuse or employment of child labour or immoral act or any other violation of
human rights or immoral acts, or
(v) I am not part of management of a child care institution in a District.;
2. If found otherwise by the State Government, I shall be liable for punitive action.
(Signature of the person)
Name and other particulars

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-model-amendment-rules-en.pdf ---
[(cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1401) II—(cid:1400)(cid:7003)(cid:3)(cid:1411) 3(i)] (cid:1423)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1414)(cid:3)(cid:1399)(cid:1438)(cid:3)(cid:1426)(cid:1438)(cid:1406)(cid:1420)(cid:7074)(cid:3)(cid:29)(cid:3)(cid:1383)(cid:1434)(cid:1438)(cid:1417)(cid:1438)(cid:1426)(cid:1413) 135
FORM 50
[RULE 21A (2)]
DECLARATION BY THE FOSTER FAMILY/PERSONS APPLYING FOR GROUP FOSTER CARE
I/we ........................... applying for the Group Foster care hereby certify that:
(i) I/we do not have any previous conviction record.
(ii) I/we are not involved in any immoral act or in any act of child abuse or employment of child labour.
(iii) I/we have not been black listed by the Central or State Government.
2. If found otherwise by the State Government, I shall be liable for punitive action and immediate
disqualification.
(Signature of persons/foster family)
Name and other particulars”
[F. No. CW-II-11/1/2016-CW-II-Part (1)]
TRIPTI GURHA, Jt. Secy.
Note : The principal notification was published in the Gazette of India vide notification number GSR 898(E), dated
21st September, 2016.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. MANOJ KUMAR Digitally signed by MANOJ KUMAR
VERMA V D E a R te M : A 20 22.09.01 22:51:16 +05'30'

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
The Gazette of India
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs
(Legislative Department)
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT, 2000
(Act No. 56 of 2000)
[30th December 2000]
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to juveniles in conflict with law and children in
need of care and protection, by providing for proper care, protection and treatment by catering to
their development needs, and by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and
disposition of matters in the best interest of children and for their ultimate rehabilitation through
various institutions established under this enactment.
WHEREAS the Constitution has, in several provisions, including clause (3) of article 15, clauses
(e) and (f) of article 39, articles 45 and 47, impose on the State a primary responsibility of
ensuring that all the needs of children are met and that their basic human rights are fully
protected;
AND WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the United Nations has adopted the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the 20th November, 1989;
AND WHEREAS, the Convention on the Rights of the Child has prescribed a set of standards to
be adhered to by all State parties in securing the best interests of the child;
AND WHEREAS, the Convention on the Rights of the Child emphasises social reintegration of
child victims, to the extent possible, without resorting to judicial proceedings;
AND WHEREAS, the Government of India has ratified the Convention on the 11th December,
1992;
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to re-enact the existing law relating to juveniles bearing in mind
the standards prescribed in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing rules), the
United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990), and all other
relevant international instruments.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2000.
(2) it extends to the Whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
a. "advisory board" means a Central or a state advisory board or a district and city level advisory
board, as the case may be, constituted under section 62;
b. "begging" means-
i. soliciting or receiving alms in a public place or entering into any private premises for the
purpose of soliciting or receiving alms, whether under any pretence;
ii. exposing or exhibiting with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound, injury,
deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or of an animal;
c. "Board" means a Juvenile Justice Board constituted under section 4;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
d. "child in need of care and protection" means a child - who is found without any home or settled
place or abode and without any ostensible means of subsistence,
ii. who resides with a person (whether a guardian of the child or not) and such person-
a. has threatened to kill or injure the child and there is a reasonable likelihood of the threat being
carried out, or
b. has killed, abused or neglected some other child or children and there is a reasonable
likelihood of the child in question being killed, abused or neglected by that person,
iii. who is mentally or physically challenged or ill children or children suffering from terminal
diseases or incurable diseases having no one to support or look after,
iv. who has a parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is unfit or incapacitated to exercise
control over the child,
v. who does not have parent and no one is willing to take care of or whose parents have
abandoned him or who is missing and run away child and whose parents cannot be found after
reasonable injury,
vi. who is being or is likely to be grossly abused, tortured or exploited for the purpose of sexual
abuse or illegal acts,
vii. who is found vulnerable and is likely to be inducted into drug abuse or trafficking,
viii. who is being or is likely to be abused for unconscionable gains,
ix. who is victim of any armed conflict, civil commotion or natural calamity;
e. "children's home" means an institution established by a State Government or by voluntary
organisation and certified by that Government under section 34;
f. "Committee" means a Child Welfare Committee constituted under section 29;
g. "competent authority" means in relation to children in need of care and protection a Committee
and in relation to juveniles in conflict with law a Board;
h. "fit institution" means a governmental or a registered non-governmental organisation or a
voluntary organisation prepared to own the responsibility of a child and such organisation is found
fit by the competent authority;
i. "fit person" means a person, being a social worker or any other person, who is prepared to own
the responsibiliy of a child and is found fit by the competent authority to receive and take care of
the child;
j. "guardian", in relation to a child, means his natural guardian or any other person having the
actual charge or control over the child and recognised by the competent authority as a guardian
in course of proceedings before that authority;
k. "juvenile" or "child" means a person who has not completed eighteenth year of age;
l. "juvenile in conflict with law" means a juvenile who is alleged to have committed an offence;
m. "local authority" means Panchayats at the village and Zila Parishad at the district level and
shall also include a Municipal Committee or Corporation or a Cantonment Board or such other
body legally entitled to function as local authority by the Government;
n. "narcotic drug" and "psychotropic substance" shall have the meanings respectively assigned to
them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985);
o. "observation home" means a home established by a State Government or by a voluntary
organisation and certified by that State Government under section 8 as an observation home for
the juvenile in conflict with law;
p. "offence" means an offence punishable under any law for the time being in force;
q. "place of safety" means any place or institution (not being a police lock-up or jail), the person
incharge of which is willing temporarily to receive and take care of the juvenile and which, in the
opinion of the competent authority, may be a place of safety for the juvenile;
r. "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this act;
s. "Probation officer" means an officer appointed by the State Government as a probation officer
under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958);
t. "public place" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act,
1956 (104 of 1956);
u. "shelter home" means a home or a drop-in-centre set up under section 37;
v. "special home" means an institution established by a State Government or by a voluntary
organisation and certified by that Government under section 9;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
w. "special juvenile police unit" means a unit of the police force of a State designated for handling
of juveniles or children under section 63;
x. "State Government" , in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator of that Union
territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
y. all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that code.
3. Continuation of Inquiry in respect of juvenile who has ceased to be a juvenile.- Where an
inquiry has been initiated against a juvenile in conflict with law or a child in need of care and
protection and during the course of such inquiry the juvenile or the child ceases to be such, then,
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, the
inquiry may be continued and orders may be made in respect of such person as if such person
had continued to be a juvenile or a child.
CHAPTER II
JUVENILE IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
4. Juvenile Justice Board.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute for a district or a group of districts specified in the notification, one or more Juvenile
Justice Boards for exercising the powers and discharging the duties conferred or imposed on
such Boards in relation to juveniles in conflict with law under this act.
(2) A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, as
the case may be, and two social workers of whom at least one shall be a woman, forming a
Bench and every such Bench shall have the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class and the Magistrate on the Board shall be designated as the principal
Magistrate.
(3) No Magistrate shall be appointed as a member of the Board unless he has special knowledge
or training in child psychology or child welfare and no social worker shall be appointed as a
member of the Board unless he has been actively involved in health, education, or welfare
activities pertaining to children for at least seven years.
(4) The term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which such member may
resign shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The appointment of any member of the Board may be terminated after holding inquiry, by the
State Government, if -
i. he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested under this act,
ii. he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such conviction has not
been reversed or he has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence,
iii. he fails to attend the proceedings of the Board foe consecutive three months without any valid
reason or he fails to attend less than three-fourth of the sittings in a year.
5. Procedure, etc. in relation to Board.- (1) The Board shall meet at such times and shall, observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be
prescribed.
(2) A child in conflict with law may be produced before an individual member of the Board, when
the Board is not sitting.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
(3) A Board may act notwithstanding the absence of any member of the Board, and no order
made by the Board shall be invalid by reason only of the absence of any member during any
stage of proceedings:
Provided that there shall be at least two members including the principal Magistrate present at the
time of final disposal of the case.
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Board in the interim or
final disposition, the opinion of the majority shall prevail, but where there is no such majority, the
opinion of the principal Magistrate, shall prevail.
6. Powers of Juvenile Justice Board.- (1) Where a Board has been constituted for any district or a
group of districts, such Board shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force but save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, have power to deal
exclusively with all proceedings under this Act, relating to juvenile in conflict with law.
(2) The powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act may also be exercised by the High
Court and the Court of Session, when the proceedings comes before them in appeal, revision or
otherwise.
7. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate not empowered under the Act.- (1) When any
Magistrate not empowered to exercise the powers of a Board under this Act is of the opinion that
a person brought before him under any of the provisions of this Act (other than for the purpose of
giving evidence), is a juvenile or the child, he shall without any delay record such opinion and
forward the juvenile or the child, and the record of the proceeding to the competent authority
having jurisdiction over the proceeding.
(2) The competent authority to which the proceeding is forwarded under sub-section (1) shall hold
the inquiry as if the juvenile or the child had originally been brought before it.
8. Observation homes.- (1) Any State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or
under an agreement with voluntary organisations, observation homes in every district or a group
of districts, as may be required for the temporary reception of any juvenile in conflict with law
during the pendency of any inquiry regarding them under this Act.
(2) Where the State Government is of opinion that any institution other than a home established
or maintained under sub-section (1), is fit for the temporary reception of juvenile in conflict with
law during the pendency of any inquiry regarding them under this Act, it may certify such
substitution as an observation home for purposes of this Act.
(3) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the management of
observation homes, including the standards and various types of services to be provided by them
for rehabilitation and social integration of a juvenile, and the circumstances under which, and the
manner in which, the certification of an observation home may be granted or withdrawn.
(4) Every juvenile who is not placed under the charge of parent or guardian and is sent to an
observation home shall be initially kept in a reception unit of the observation home for preliminary
inquiries, care and classification for juveniles according to his age group, such as seven to twelve
years, twelve to sixteen years and sixteen to eighteen years, giving due considerations to
physical and mental status and degree of the offence committed, for further induction into
observation home.
9. Special Homes.- (1) Any State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or under
an agreement with voluntary organisations, special homes in every district or a group of districts,
as may be required for reception and rehabilitation of juvenile in conflict with law under this Act.
(2) Where the State Government is of opinion that any institution other than a home established
or maintained under sub-section (1), is fit for the reception of juvenile in conflict with law to be
sent there under this Act, it may certify such institution as a special home for the purposes of this
Act.
(3) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the management of
special homes, including the standards and various types of services to be provided by them
which are necessary for re-socialisation of a juvenile, and the circumstances under which and the
manner in which, the certification of a special home may be granted or withdrawn.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
(4) The rules made under sub-section (3) may also provide for the classification and separation of
juvenile in conflict with law on the basis of age and the nature of offences committed by them and
his mental and physical status.
10. Apprehension of juvenile in conflict with law.- (1) As soon as a juvenile in conflict with law is
apprehended by police, he shall be placed under the charge of the special juvenile police unit or
the designated police officer who shall immediately report the matter to a member of the Board.
(2) The State Government may make rules consistent with this Act,-
i. to provide for persons through whom ( including registered voluntary organisations) any juvenile
in conflict with law may be produced before the Board;
ii. to provide the manner in which such juvenile may be sent to an observation home.
11. Control of custodian over juvenile .- Any person in whose charge a juvenile is placed in
pursuance of this Act shall, while the order is in force have the control over the juvenile as he
would have if he were his parents, and shall be responsible for his maintenance, and the juvenile
shall continue in his charge for the period stated by competent authority, notwithstanding that he
is claimed by his parents or any other person.
12. Bail of juvenile.- (1) When any person accused of a bailable or non-bailable offence, and
apparently a juvenile, is arrested or detained or appears or is brought before a Board, such
person shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974) or in any other law for the time being in force, be released on bail with or without surety but
he shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that the release is
likely to bring him into association with any known criminal or expose him to moral, physical or
psychological danger or that his release would defeat the ends of justice.
(2) When such person having been arrested is not released on bail under sub-section (1) by the
officer incharge of the police station, such officer shall cause him to be kept only in an
observation home in the prescribed manner until he can brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub-section (1) by the Board it shall, instead
of committing him to prison, make an order sending him to an observation home or a place of
safety for such period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding him as may be specified in the
order.
13. Information to parent, guardian or probation officer.- Where a juvenile is arrested, the officer
incharge of the police station or the special juvenile police unit to which the juvenile is brought
shall, as soon as may be after the arrest, inform-
(a) the parent or guardian of the juvenile , if he can be found, of such arrest and direct him to be
present at the Board before which the juvenile will appear; and
(b) the probation officer of such arrest to enable him to obtain information regarding the
antecedents and family background of the juvenile and other material circumstances likely to be
of assistance to the Board for making the inquiry.
14. Inquiry by Board regarding juvenile.- Where a juvenile having been charged with the offence
is produced before a Board, the Board shall hold the inquiry in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and may make such order in relation to the juvenile as it deems fit:
Provided that an inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of four months from
the date of its commencement, unless the period is extended by the Board having regard to the
circumstances of the case and in special cases after recording the reasons in writing for such
extension.
15. Order that may be passed regarding juvenile.- (1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a
juvenile has committed an offence, then notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
other law for the time being in force, the Board may, if it thinks so fit,-
(a) allow the juvenile to go home after advice or admonition following appropriate inquiry against
and counselling to the parent or the guardian and the juvenile;
(b) direct the juvenile to participate in group counselling and similar activities;
(c) order the juvenile to perform community service;
(d) order the parent of the juvenile or the juvenile himself to pay a fine, if he is over fourteen years
of age and earns money;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
(e) direct the juvenile to be released on probation of good conduct and placed under the care of
any parent, guardian or other fit person, on such parent, guardian or other fit person executing a
bond, with or without surety, as the Board may require, for the good behaviour and well-being of
the juvenile for any period not exceeding three years;
(f) direct the juvenile to be released on probation of good conduct and placed under the care of
any fit institution for the good behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for any period not
exceeding three years;
(g) make an order directing the juvenile to be sent to a special home,-
i. in the case of juvenile, over seventeen years but less than eighteen years of age for a period of
not less than two years;
ii. in case of any other juvenile for the period until he ceases to be a juvenile :
Provided that the Board may, if it is satisfied that having regard to the nature of the offence and
the circumstances of the case it is expedient so to do, for reasons to be recorded, reduce the
period of stay to such period as it thinks fit.
2. The Board shall obtain the social investigation report on juvenile either through a probation
officer or a recognised voluntary organisation or otherwise, and shall take into consideration the
findings of such report before passing an order.
3. Where an order under clause (d), clause (e) or clause (f) of sub-section (1) is made, the Board
may, if it is of opinion that in the interests of the juvenile and of the public, it is expedient so to do,
in addition make an order that the juvenile in conflict with law shall remain under the supervision
of a probation officer named in the order during such period, not exceeding three years as may
be specified therein, and may in such supervision order impose such conditions as it deems
necessary for the due supervision of the juvenile in conflict with law :
Provided that if at any time afterwards it appears to the Board on receiving a report from the
probation officer or otherwise, that the juvenile in conflict with law has not been of good behaviour
during the period of supervision or that the fit institution under whose care the juvenile was placed
is no longer able or willing to ensure the good behaviour and well-being of the juvenile it may,
after making such inquiry as it deems fit, order the juvenile in conflict with law to be sent to a
special home.
4. The Board shall while making a supervision order under sub-section (3), explain to the juvenile
and the parent, guardian or other fit person or fit institution, as the case may be, under whose
care the juvenile has been placed, the terms and conditions of the order shall forthwith furnish
one copy of the supervision order to the juvenile, the parent, guardian or other fit person or fit
institution, as the case may be, the sureties, if any, and the probation officer.
16. Order that may not be passed against juvenile.-(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force, no juvenile in conflict with law shall be
sentenced to death or life imprisonment, or committed to prison in default of payment of fine or in
default of furnishing security :
Provided that where a juvenile who has attained the age of sixteen years has committed an
offence and the Board is satisfied that the offence committed is of so serious in nature or that his
conduct and behaviour have been such that it would not be in his interest or in the interest of
other juvenile in a special home to send him to such special home and that none of the other
measures provided under this Act is suitable or sufficient, the Board may order the juvenile in
conflict with law to be kept in such place of safety and in such manner as it thinks fit and shall
report the case for the order of the State Government.
(2) On receipt of a report from a Board under sub-section (1), the State Government may make
such arrangement in respect of the juvenile as it deems proper and may order such juvenile to be
kept under protective custody at such place and on such conditions as it thinks fit :
Provided that the period of detention so ordered shall not exceed the maximum period of
imprisonment to which the juvenile could have been sentenced for the offence committed.
17. Proceeding under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure not component against
juvenile.- Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974) no proceeding shall be instituted and no order shall be passed against the
juvenile under Chapter VIII of the said Code.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
18. No joint proceeding of juvenile and person not a juvenile.-(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in section 223 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other law
for the time being in force, no juvenile shall be charged with or tried for any offence together with
a person who is not a juvenile.
(2) If a juvenile is accused of an offence for which under section 223 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force, such juvenile and any
person who is not a juvenile would, but for the prohibition contained in sub-section (1), have been
charged and tried together, the Board taking cognizance of that offence shall direct separate trials
of the juvenile and the other person.
19. Removal of disqualification attaching to conviction.-(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law, a juvenile who has committed an offence and has been dealt with under the
provisions of this Act shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attaching to a conviction of an offence
under such law.
(2) The Board shall make an order directing that the relevant records of such conviction shall be
removed after the expiry of the period of appeal or a reasonable period as prescribed under the
rules, as the case may be.
20. Special provision in respect of pending cases.- Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, all proceedings in respect of a juvenile pending in any court in any area on the date on which
this Act comes into force in that area, shall be continued in that court as if this Act had not been
passed and if the court finds that the juvenile has committed an offence, it shall record such
finding and instead of passing any sentence in respect of the juvenile, forward the juvenile to the
Board which shall pass orders in respect of that juvenile in accordance with the provisions of this
Act as if it had been satisfied on inquiry under this Act that a juvenile has committed the offence.
21. Prohibition of publication of name, etc., of juvenile involved in any proceeding under the Act.-
(1) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or visual media of any inquiry regarding a
juvenile in conflict with law under this Act shall disclose the name, address or school or any other
particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the juvenile nor shall any picture of any such
juvenile be published :
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing the authority holding the inquiry may permit
such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure is in interest of the juvenile.
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable with fine, which
may extend to one thousand rupees.
22. Provision in respect of escaped juvenile.- Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any other law for the time being in force, any police officer may take charge without warrant of
a juvenile in conflict with law who has escaped from a special home or an observation home or
from the care of a person under whom he was placed under this Act, and shall be sent back to
the special home or the observation home or that person, as the case may be; and no proceeding
shall be instituted in respect of the juvenile by reason of such escape, but the special home, or
the observation home or the person may, after giving the information to the Board which passed
the order in respect of the juvenile, take such steps in respect of the juvenile as may be deemed
necessary under the provisions of this Act.
23. Punishment for cruelty to juvenile or child.- Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control
over, a juvenile or the child, assaults, abandons, exposes or wilfully neglects the juvenile or
causes or procures him to be assaulted, abandoned, exposed or neglected in a manner likely to
cause such juvenile or the child unnecessary mental or physical suffering shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a team which may extend to six months, or fine, or with both.
24. Employment of juvenile or child for begging.-(1) Whoever employs or uses any juvenile or the
child for the purpose or causes any juvenile to beg shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over, a juvenile or the child abets the
commission of the offence punishable under sub-section (1), shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
25. Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug or psychotropic substance to juvenile or
child.- Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any juvenile or the child any intoxicating liquor in
a public place or any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance except upon the order of duly
qualified medical practitioner or in case of sickness shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall be liable to fine.
26. Exploitation of juvenile or child employee.- Whoever ostensibly procures a juvenile or the child
for the purpose of any hazardous employment keeps him in bondage and withholds his earnings
or uses such earning for his own purposes shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years and shall be liable to fine.
27. Special offences.- The offences punishable under sections 23, 24, 25 and 26 shall be
cognizable.
28. Alternative punishment.- Where an act or omission constitute an offence punishable under
this Act and also under any other Central or State Act, then, notwithstanding anything contained
in any law for the time being in force, the offender found guilty of such offences shall be liable to
punishment only under such Act as provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
CHAPTER III
CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
29. Child Welfare Committee.-(1) The State Government may, by notification in Official Gazette,
constitute for every district or group of districts, specified in the notification, one or more Child
Welfare Committees for exercising the powers and discharge the duties conferred on such
Committees in relation to child in need of care and protection under this Act.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and four other members as the State
Government may think fit to appoint, of whom at least one shall be a woman and another, an
expert on matters concerning children.
(3) The qualifications of the Chairperson and the members, and the tenure for which they may be
appointed shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The appointment of any member of the Committee may be terminated, after holding inquiry,
by the State Government, if-
i. he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested under this Act;
ii. he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such conviction has not
been reversed or he has not been granted full pardon in respect of such offence;
iii. he fails to attend the proceedings of the Committee for consecutive three months without any
valid reason or he fails to attend less than three-fourth of the sittings in a year.
(5) The Committee shall function as a Bench of Magistrates and shall have the powers conferred
by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case
may be, a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.
30. Procedure, etc., in relation to Committee.- (1) The Committee shall meet at such times and
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as
may be prescribed.
(2) A child in need of care and protection may be produced before an individual member for being
placed in safe custody or otherwise when the Committee is not in session.
(3) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Committee at the time of
any interim decision, the opinion of the majority shall prevail but where there is no such majority
the opinion of the Chairperson shall prevail.
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Committee may act, notwithstanding the
absence of any member of the Committee, and no order made by the Committee shall be invalid
by reason only of the absence of any member during any stage of the proceeding.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
31. Powers of Committee.-(1) The Committee shall have the final authority to dispose of cases for
the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of the children as well as to
provide for their basic needs and protection of human rights.
(2) Where a Committee has been constituted for any area, such Committee shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force but save as otherwise expressly
provided in this Act, have the power to deal exclusively with all proceedings under this Act
relating to children in need of care and protection.
32. Production before Committee.-(1) Any child in need of care and protection may be produced
before the Committee by one of the following persons :-
(i) any police officer or special juvenile police unit or a designated police officer;
(ii) any public servant;
(iii) childline, a registered voluntary organisation or by such other voluntary organisation or an
agency as may be recognised by the State Government;
(iv) any social worker or a public spirited citizen authorised by the State Government; or
(v) by the child himself.
(2) The State Government may make rules consistent with this Act to provide for the manner of
making the report to the police and to the Committee and the manner of sending and entrusting
the child to children's home pending the inquiry.
33. Inquiry.- (1) On receipt of a report under section 32, the Committee or any police officer or
special juvenile police unit or the designated police officer shall hold an inquiry in the prescribed
manner and the Committee, on its own or on the report from any person or agency as mentioned
in sub-section (1) of section 32, may pass an order to send the child to the children's home for
speedy inquiry by a social worker or child welfare officer.
(2) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within four months of the receipt of the order
or within such shorter period as may be fixed by the Committee: Provided that the time for the
submission of the inquiry report may be extended by such period as the Committee may, having
regard to the circumstances and for the reasons recorded in writing, determine.
(3) After the completion of the inquiry if the Committee is of the opinion that the said child has no
family or ostensible support, it may allow the child to remain in the children's home or shelter
home till suitable rehabilitation is found for him or till he attains the age of eighteen years.
34. Children's homes.-(1) The State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or in
association with voluntary organisations, children's homes, in every district or group of districts,
as the case may be, for the reception of child in need of care and protection during the pendency
of any inquiry and subsequently for their care, treatment, education, training, development and
rehabilitation.
(2) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the management of
children's homes including the standards and the nature of services to be provided by them, and
the circumstances under which, and the manner in which, the certification of a children's home or
recognition to a voluntary organisation may be granted or withdrawn.
35. Inspection.- (1) The State Government may appoint inspection committees for the children's
homes (hereinafter referred to as the inspection committees) for the State, a district and city, as
the case may be, for such period and for such purposes as may be prescribed.
(2) The inspection committee of a State, district or of a city shall consist of such number of
representatives from the State Government, Local Authority, Committee, voluntary organisations
and such other medical experts and social workers as may be prescribed.
36. Social auditing.- The Central Government or State Government may monitor and evaluate the
functioning of the children's homes at such period and through such persons and institutions as
may be specified by that Government.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
37. Shelter homes.- (1) The State Government may recognise, reputed and capable voluntary
organisations and provide them assistance to set up and administer as many shelter homes for
juveniles or children as may be required.
(2) The shelter homes referred in sub-section.-(1) shall function as drop-in-centres for the children
in the need of urgent support who have been brought to such homes through such persons as
are referred to in sub-section (1) of section 32.
(3) As far as possible, the shelter homes shall have such facilities as may be prescribed by the
rules.
38. Transfer.- (1) If during the inquiry it is found that the child hails from the place outside the
jurisdiction of the Committee, the Committee shall order the transfer of the child to the competent
authority having jurisdiction over the place of residence of the child.
(2) Such juvenile or the child shall be escorted by the staff of the home in which he is lodged
originally.
(3) The State Government may make rules to provide for the travelling allowance to be paid to the
child.
39. Restoration.- (1) Restoration of and protection to a child shall be the prime objective of any
children's home or the shelter home.
(2) The children's home or a shelter home, as the case may be, shall take such steps as are
considered necessary for the restoration of and protection to a child deprived of his family
environment temporarily or permanently where such child is under the care and protection of a
children's home or a shelter home, as the case may be.
(3) The Committee shall have the powers to restore any child in need of care and protection to his
parent, guardian, fit person or fit institution, as the case may be, and give them suitable
directions.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section "restoration of child" means restoration to-
(a) parents;
(b) adopted parents;
(c) foster parents.
CHAPTER IV
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL REINTEGRATION
40. Process of rehabilitation and social reintegration.- The rehabilitation and social reintegration
of a child shall begin during the stay of the child in a children's home or special home and the
rehabilitation and social reintegration of children shall be carried out alternatively by (i) adoption,
(ii) foster care, (iii) sponsorship, and (iv) sending the child to an after-care organisation.
41. Adoption.- (1) The primary responsibility for providing care and protection to children shall be
that of his family.
(2) Adoption shall be resorted to for the rehabilitation of such children as are orphaned,
abandoned, neglected and abused through institutional and non-institutional methods.
(3) In keeping with the provisions of the various guidelines for adoption issued from time to time
by the State Government, the Board shall be empowered to give children in adoption and carry
out such investigations as are required or giving children in adoption in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the State Government from time to time in this regard.
(4) The children's homes or the State Government run institutions for orphans shall be recognised
as an adoption agencies both for scrutiny and placement of such children for adoption in
accordance with the guidelines issued under sub-section (3).
(5) No child shall be offered for adoption-
a. until two members of the Committee declare the child legally free for placement in the case of
abandoned children,

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
b. till the two months period for reconsideration by the parent is over in the case of surrendered
children, and
c. without his consent in the case of a child who can understand and express his consent.
(6) The Board may allow a child to be given in adoption-
d. to a single parent, and
e. to parents to adopt a child of same sex irrespective of the number of living biological sons or
daughters.
42. Foster care.- (1) The foster care may be used for temporary placement of those infants who
are ultimately to be given for adoption.
(2) In foster care, the child may be placed in another family for a short or extended period of time,
depending upon the circumstances where the child's own parent usually visit regularly and
eventually after the rehabilitation, where the children may return to their own homes.
(3) The State Government may make rules for the purposes of carrying out the scheme of foster
care programme of children.
43. Sponsorship.-(1) The sponsorship programme may provide supplementary support to
families, to children's homes and to special homes to meet medical, nutritional, educational and
other needs of the children with a view to improving their quality of life.
(2) The State Government may make rules for the purposes of carrying out various schemes of
sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual sponsorship, group sponsorship or
community sponsorship.
44. After-care organisation.- The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide-
(a) for the establishment or recognition of after-care organisations and the functions that may be
performed by them under this Act;
(b) for a scheme of after-care programme to be followed by such after-care organisations for the
purpose of taking care of juveniles or the children after they leave special homes, children homes
and for the purpose of enabling them to lead an honest, industrious and useful life;
(c) for the preparation or submission of a report by the probation officer or any other officer
appointed by that Government in respect of each juvenile or the child prior to his discharge from a
special home, children's home, regarding the necessity and nature of after-care of such juvenile
or of a child, the period of such after-care, supervision thereof and for the submission of report by
the probation officer or any other officer appointed for the purpose, on the progress of each
juvenile or the child;
(d) for the standards and the nature of services to be maintained by such after care organisations;
(e) for such other matters as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the scheme of
after-care programme for the juvenile or the child :
Provided that any rule made under this section shall not provide for such juvenile or child to stay
in the after-care organisation for more than three years :
Provided further that a juvenile or child over seventeen years of age but less than eighteen years
of age would stay in the after-care organisation till he attains the age of twenty years.
45. Linkages and co-ordination.- The State Government may make rules to ensure effective
linkages between various governmental, non-governmental, corporate and other community
agencies for facilitating the rehabilitation and social reintegration of the child.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
46. Attendance of parent or guardian of juvenile or child.- Any competent authority before which a
juvenile or the child is brought under any of the provisions of this Act, may, whenever it so thinks
fit, require any parent or guardian having the actual charge of or control over the juvenile or the
child to be present at any proceeding in respect of the juvenile or the child.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
47. Dispensing with attendance of juvenile or child.- If, at any stage during the course of an
inquiry, a competent authority is satisfied that the attendance of the juvenile or the child is not
essential for the purpose of inquiry, the competent authority may dispense with his attendance
and proceed with the inquiry in the absence of the juvenile or the child.
48. Committal to approved place of juvenile or child suffering from dangerous diseases and his
future disposal.-(1) When a juvenile or the child who has been brought before a competent
authority under this Act, is found to be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical
treatment or physical or mental complaint that will respond to treatment, the competent authority
may send the juvenile or the child to any place recognised to be an approved place in accordance
with the rules made under this Act for such period as it may think necessary for the required
treatment.
(2) Where a juvenile or the child is found to be suffering from leprosy, sexually transmitted
disease, Hepatitis B, open cases of Tuberculosis and such other diseases or is of unsound mind,
he shall be dealt with separately through various specialised referral services or under the
relevant laws as such.
49. Presumption and determination of age.- (1) Where it appears to a competent authority that
person brought before it under any of the provisions of this Act (otherwise than for the purpose of
giving evidence) is a juvenile or the child, the competent authority shall make due inquiry so as to
the age of that person and for that purpose shall take such evidence as may be necessary (but
not an affidavit) and shall record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or the child or not,
stating his age as nearly as may be.
(2) No order of a competent authority shall be deemed to have become invalid merely by any
subsequent proof that the person in respect of whom the order has been made is not a juvenile or
the child, and the age recorded by the competent authority to be the age of person so brought
before it, shall for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be the true age of that person.
50. Sending a juvenile or child outside jurisdiction.- In the case of a juvenile or the child, whose
ordinary place of residence lies outside the jurisdiction of the competent authority before which he
is brought, the competent authority may, if satisfied after due inquiry that it is expedient so to do,
send the juvenile or the child back to a relative or other person who is fit and willing to receive him
at his ordinary place of residence and exercise proper care and control over him, notwithstanding
that such place of residence is outside the jurisdiction of the competent authority; and the
competent authority exercising jurisdiction over the place to which the juvenile or the child is sent
shall in respect of any matter arising subsequently have the same powers in relation to the
juvenile or the child as if the original order had been passed by itself.
51. Reports to be treated as confidential.- The report of the probation officer or social worker
considered by the competent authority shall be treated as confidential:
Provided that the competent authority may, if it so thinks fit, communicate the substance thereof
to the juvenile or the child or his parent or guardian and may give such juvenile or the child,
parent or guardian an opportunity of producing such evidence as may be relevant to the matter
stated in the report.
52. Appeals.- (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person aggrieved by an order
made by a competent authority under this Act may, within thirty days from the date of such order,
prefer an appeal to the Court of Session:
Provided that the Court of Session may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of
thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the
appeal in time.
(2) No appeal shall lie from-
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect of a juvenile alleged to have committed an
offence; or

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of a finding that a person is not a neglected
juvenile.
(3) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court of Session passed in appeal under this
section.
53. Revision.-The High Court may, at any time, either of its own motion or on an application
received in this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in which any competent authority or
Court of Session has passed an order for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or
propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit:
Provided that the High Court shall not pass an order under this section prejudicial to any person
without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
54. Procedure in inquiries, appeals and revision proceedings.- (1) Save as otherwise expressly
provided by this Act, a competent authority while holding any inquiry under any of the provisions
of this Act, shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed and subject thereto, shall follow, as
far as may be, the procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974) for
trials in summons cases.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the procedure to be followed in
hearing appeals or revision proceedings under this Act shall be, as far as practicable, in
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974).
55. Power to amend orders.- (1) Without prejudice to the provisions for appeal and revision under
this Act, any competent authority may, on an application received in this behalf, amend any order
as to the institution to which a juvenile or the child is to be sent or as to the person under whose
care or supervision a juvenile or the child is to be placed under this Act:
Provided that there shall be at least two members and the parties or its defence present during
the course of hearing for passing an amendment in relation to any of its order.
(2) Clerical mistakes in orders passed by a competent authority or errors arising therein from any
accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the competent authority either on its
own motion or on an application received in this behalf.
56. Power of competent authority to discharge and transfer juvenile or child.- The competent
authority or the local authority may, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, at any time,
order a child in need of care and protection or a juvenile in conflict with law to be discharged or
transferred from one children's home or special home to another, as the case may be, keeping in
view the best interest of the child or the juvenile, and his natural place of stay, either absolutely or
on such conditions as it may think fit to impose:
Provided that the total period of stay of the juvenile or the child in a children's home or a special
home or a fit institution or under a fit person shall not be increased by such transfer.
57. Transfer between children's homes, under the Act, and juvenile homes, of like nature in
different parts of India.- The State Government or the local authority may direct any child or the
juvenile to be transferred from any children's home or special home outside the State to any other
children's home, special home or institution of a like nature with the prior intimation to the local
Committee or the Board, as the case may be, and such order shall be deemed to be operative for
the competent authority of the area to which the child or the juvenile is sent.
58. Transfer of juvenile or child of unsound mind or suffering from leprosy or addicted to drugs.-
Where it appears to the competent authority that any juvenile or the child kept in a special home
or a children's home or shelter home or in an institution in pursuance of this Act, is suffering from
leprosy or is of unsound mind or is addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, the
competent authority may order his removal to a leper asylum or mental hospital or treatment
centre for drug addicts or to a place of safety for being kept there for such period not exceeding
the period for which he is required to be kept under the order of the competent authority or for
such further period as may be certified by the medical officer necessary for the proper treatment
of the juvenile or the child.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
59. Release and absence of juvenile or child on placement.- (1) When a juvenile or the child is
kept in a children's home or special home and on a report of a probation officer or social worker
or of Government or a voluntary organisation, as the case may be, the competent authority may
consider, the release of such juvenile or the child permitting him to live with his parent or guardian
or under the supervision of any authorised person named in the order, willing to receive and take
charge of the juvenile or the child to educate and train him for some useful trade or calling or to
look after him for rehabilitation.
(2) The competent authority may also permit leave of absence to any juvenile or the child, to
allow him, on special occasions like examination, marriage of relatives, death of kith and kin or
the accident or serious illness of parent or any emergency of like nature, to go on leave under
supervision, for maximum seven days, excluding the time taken in journey.
(3) Where a permission has been revoked or forfeited and the juvenile or the child refuses or fails
to return to the home concerned or juvenile to which he was directed so to return, the Board may,
if necessary, cause him to be taken charge of and to be taken back to the concerned home.
(4) The time during which a juvenile or the child is absent from a concerned home in pursuance of
such permission granted under this section shall be deemed to be part of the time foe which he is
liable to be kept in the special home :
Provided that when a juvenile has failed to return to the special home on the permission being
revoked or forfeited, the time which lapses after his failure so to return shall be excluded in
computing the time during which he is liable to be kept in the institution.
60. Contribution by parents.- (1) The competent authority which makes an order for sending a
juvenile or the child to a children's home or to a special home or placing the juvenile under the
care of a fit person or fit institution may make an order requiring the parent or other person liable
to maintain the juvenile or the child to contribute to his maintenance, if able to do so, in the
prescribed manner according to income.
(2) The competent authority may direct, if necessary, the payment to be made to poor parent or
guardian by the Superintendent or the Project Manager of the home to pay such expenses for the
journey of the inmate or parent or guardian or both, from the home to his ordinary place of
residence at the time of sending the juvenile as may be prescribed.
61. Fund.- (1) The State Government or local authority may create a Fund under such name as it
thinks fit for the welfare and rehabilitation of the juvenile or the child dealt with under this Act.
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund such voluntary donations, contributions or subscriptions as
may be made by any individual or organisation.
(3) The Fund created under sub-section (1) shall be administered by the State advisory board in
such manner and for such purposes as may be prescribed.
62. Central, State, district and city advisory boards.- (1) The Central Government or a State
Government may constitute a Central or State Advisory board, as the case may be, to advise that
Government on matter relating to the establishment and maintenance of the homes, mobilisation
of resources, provision of facilities for education, training and rehabilitation of child in need of care
and protection and juvenile in conflict with law and co-ordination among the various official and
non-official agencies concerned.
(2) The Central or State advisory board shall consist of such persons as the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, may think fit and shall include eminent social
workers, representatives of voluntary organisations in the field of the child welfare corporate
sector, academicians, medical professionals and the concerned Department of the State
Government.
(3) The district or city level inspection committee constituted under section 35 of this Act shall
also function as the district or city advisory board.
63. Special juvenile police unit.- (1) In order to enable the police officers who frequently or
exclusively deal with juveniles or are primarily engaged in the prevention of juvenile crime or
handling of the juveniles or children under this Act to perform their functions more effectively, they
shall be specially instructed and trained.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
(2) In every police station at least one officer with aptitude and appropriate training and
orientation may be designated as the 'juvenile or the child welfare officer' who will handle the
juvenile or the child in co-ordination with the police.
(3) Special juvenile police unit, of which all police officers designated as above, to handle
juveniles or children will be members, may be created in every district and city to co-ordinate and
to upgrade the police treatment of the juveniles and the children.
64. Juvenile in conflict with law undergoing sentence at commencement of this Act.- In any area
in which this Act is brought into force, the State Government or the local authority may direct that
a juvenile in conflict with law who is undergoing any sentence of imprisonment at the
commencement of this Act, shall, in lieu of undergoing such sentence, be sent to a special home
or kept in fit institution in such manner as the State Government or the local authority thinks fit for
the remainder of the period of the sentence; and the provisions of this Act shall apply to the
juvenile as if he had been ordered by the Board to be sent to such special home or institution or,
as the case may be, ordered to be kept under protective care under sub-section (2) of section 16
of this Act.
65. Procedure in respect of bonds.- Provisions of Chapter XXXIII of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, as far as nay be, apply to bonds taken under this Act.
66. Delegation of powers.- The State Government may, by the general order, direct that any
power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, if
any, as may be prescribed in the order, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that
Government or the local authority.
67. Protection of action taken in good faith.- No suit or legal proceedings shall lie against the
State Government or voluntary organisation running the home or any officer and the staff
appointed in pursuance of this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or order made thereunder.
68. Power to make rules.- (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :-
i. the term of office of the members of the Board, and the manner in which such member may
resign under sub-section (4) of section (4);
ii. the time of the meetings of the Board and the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meeting under sub-section (1) of section 5;
iii. the management of observation homes including the standards and various types of services
to be provided by them and the circumstances in which and the manner in which, the certification
of the observation home may be granted or withdrawn and such other matters as are referred to
in section 8;
iv. the management of special home including the standards and various types of services to be
provided by them and the circumstances in which and the manner in which, the certification of the
special home may be granted or withdrawn and such other matters as are referred to in section 9;
v. persons by whom any juvenile in conflict with law may be produced before the Board and the
manner of sending such juvenile to an observation home under sub-section (2) of section 10;
vi. matters relating to removal of disqualifications attaching to conviction of a juvenile under
section 19;
vii. the qualifications of the Chairperson and members, and the tenure for which they may be
appointed under sub-section (3) of section 29;
viii. the time of the meetings of the Committee and the rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at its meeting under sub-section (1) of section 30;
ix. the manner of making the report to the police and to the Committee and the manner of sending
and entrusting the child to children's home pending the inquiry under sub-section (2) of section
32;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2000.pdf ---
x. the management of children's homes including the standards and nature of services to be
provided by them, and the manner in which certification of a children's home or recognition to a
voluntary organisation may be granted or withdrawn under sub-section (2) of section 34;
xi. appointment of inspection committees for children's homes, their tenure and purposes for
which inspection committees may be appointed and such other matters as are referred to in
section 35;
xii. facilities to be provided by the shelter homes under sub-section (3) of section 37;
xiii. for carrying out the scheme of foster care programme of children under sub-section (3) of
section 42;
xiv. for carrying out various schemes of sponsorship of children under sub-section (2) of section
43;
xv. matters relating to after-care organisation under section 44;
xvi. for ensuring effective linkages between various agencies for facilitating rehabilitation and
social integration of the child under section 45;
xvii. the purposes and the manner in which the Fund shall be administered under sub-section (3)
of section 61;
xviii. any other matter which is required to be or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before the Legislature of that State.
69. Repeal and savings.- (1) The Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 ( 53 of 1986) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Act shall be
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
70. Power to remove difficulties.- (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
remove the difficulty :
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years from the
commencement of this Act.
(2) However, order made under the section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
jftLVªh laö Mhö ,yö&33004@99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
vlk/kj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II—[k.M 3—mi&[k.M (i)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
izkf/dkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
la- 660] ubZ fnYyh] cq/okj] flrEcj 21] 2016@Hkkæ 30] 1938
No. 660] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 2016/BHADRA 30, 1938
    (cid:7074) 
 
 (cid:7408)(cid:7016), 21 (cid:7013) , 2016
... 898().—(cid:7286)(cid:7076) , (cid:7408) (cid:7008) ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (2016  2) (cid:7409)
 110 (cid:7409) - (1)   (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7275) (cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7263), (cid:7013)  (cid:6981)   , (cid:6981) :-
(cid:7007) - 1
(cid:7079)
1.  (cid:6979)(cid:7385)   (cid:7079).— (1)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)(cid:7385)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008) ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2016 
(2)   (cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:7298)
2. (cid:7407).— (1)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7008) (cid:6979)  ,-
(i) “”  (cid:7408) (cid:7008) ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (2016  2) (cid:7079) ;
(ii) “(cid:7079)”   (cid:7409)  68   (cid:7407) (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079) ;
(iii) “ (cid:6981)(cid:6981)”  (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  -    (cid:7079) (cid:7079) ,  (cid:7408)    (cid:6981)
   (cid:6979)    (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7408) (cid:6981)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7301) ;
(iv) “(cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)”    (cid:7079) (cid:7079) ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)
    (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7409)  ;
(v) “(cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)”   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) , (cid:7286)   (cid:7011)  , (cid:7008)    (cid:7399)  (cid:7016) ;
(vi) “ ”    (cid:7016)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7298) (cid:7367)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   
(cid:7079)     (cid:6981) (cid:7378)(cid:7298)  , (cid:7373)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) , (cid:7021) (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)  ,
 (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7004)(cid:7408)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7289)
4513 GI/2016

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(vii) “(cid:7079)(cid:7272)”   (cid:7298)   (cid:7336) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7079) (cid:7289);
(viii) “ (cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)”   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) , (cid:7286)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   -   -  (cid:7011)
 (cid:7016)    (cid:7011) (cid:7286)   (cid:7414) (cid:7021), (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7399),     ,  (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005)
(cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7298);
(ix) “(cid:7390)(cid:7334)   ” (cid:7408)     (cid:7390)   ,    (cid:7409)   (cid:7410)-(cid:7397)
(cid:7019)(cid:7312)       (cid:6981)(cid:7275)  (cid:7407) ,     (cid:7004)(cid:7013), (cid:7407) 
(cid:7021)    (cid:7013) (cid:7407)   (cid:7374)(cid:7019)     (cid:6981)   (cid:7408)   
   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7388) (cid:7019)(cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7414) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7277)  (cid:6981)-
() (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005)    (cid:7019),  (cid:6981)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7289);
() (cid:7004)  (cid:6980) (cid:7019);
() (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7019);
() , (cid:6981)(cid:7004)  ;
(.)  (cid:7079)  , (cid:6979)  (cid:7390) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979);
() (cid:7373)  (cid:6981);
()  (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  ;
()   (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
(x) “ (cid:7286) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)”   (cid:7286)      (cid:7408) (cid:7407) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7079) ;
(xi) “(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)”  (cid:7408)  (cid:6980)(cid:7385)- (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7367)    (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) ;
(xii) “(cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)”     (cid:7021)  (cid:7074)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7334) (cid:7408)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7079) ;
(xiii) “.....”   (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6979) , 2012 (2012  32) (cid:7079) ;
(xiv) “(cid:6981)--(cid:7021) ”  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)    
(cid:7079) ;
(xv) “ ”   (cid:7298)   87   (cid:6996)  (cid:7367) (cid:7407)  (cid:7079) ;
(xvi) “ (cid:7399) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)”    (cid:7016)   (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) , (cid:7286)  (cid:7016) 
 (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7399) (cid:7409)   (cid:7016)  ;
(xvii) “ (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)”  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) , (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298), (cid:7414), ,
(cid:6980)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7407)(cid:7021)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021)     (cid:7407)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7016) ;
(xviii)“  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)”   (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7079) ,   (cid:6981)  -(cid:6980)  (cid:6980)     (cid:7286)
(cid:7401)(cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)   (cid:7401) (cid:7061)   (cid:6979)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7374)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
      (cid:7409)  (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   , (cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981), 
(cid:7275)(cid:7061)   -   - (cid:7409)  (cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  , (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   
(cid:7079)      (cid:7298)    (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7301)  (cid:7008) (cid:7004)(cid:7298)  (cid:7020)    (cid:7408) 
  (cid:7021) (cid:7367) (cid:7334) (cid:7408)      (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)   (cid:6996) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)
   (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7079) (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7408)  ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 3
(cid:7021)(cid:7397):  (cid:7407)  (cid:7079)  ,  (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) 
 (cid:7409)  4   (cid:7298)
(xix) “ (cid:6979)”   (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6979) , 2012 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) ;
(xx) “(cid:6996)  (cid:6979) ”   (cid:7409)  106   (cid:7407)  (cid:7079) ;
(2)   (cid:7011)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298),   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)  (cid:7079)(cid:7334)  (cid:7289) (cid:7412)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7407) (cid:7277) ,   (cid:6981) (cid:7298),
  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7289)
(cid:7007) – 2
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
3. (cid:6981).—(cid:6996)  , (cid:7074) (cid:7286)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) 
4. (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  .—(1) (cid:6981) (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  (cid:7079) (cid:7088)   (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:7069),  
   (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  (cid:7408) ,    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021), (cid:7286)
      , (cid:7008)   (cid:7286)
(2)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7334)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7367) (cid:7409)

(3)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7289) (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)(cid:7286) (cid:6979), (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005)  (cid:7016) (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) 
 (cid:6981)       (cid:6981)       (cid:6980)  (cid:7391)(cid:7408)(cid:7004)  -(cid:6980)   (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7061) (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7018)    
(4) (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021), ,  (cid:7008) -(cid:7008)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298)   
(5) (cid:6981)   (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  ,(cid:7289)   (cid:7334) (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7079)
(cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)   (cid:7408) 
5. (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981).— (1) (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021)  (cid:6981) (cid:7334) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)  
(cid:7277) 
(2) (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298)   (cid:7074) ,  (cid:7408)  (cid:7277) (cid:7298)
(3) (cid:7021) (cid:7408)   (cid:6996)     (cid:7409)     (cid:7004)(cid:7074)   (cid:7289)
(4) (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  (cid:7407)(cid:7334)    (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7409) (cid:7334) (cid:7367) 

6. (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7286).—(1) (cid:6981)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021)    
(cid:7016)   (cid:7298)         (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7334) (cid:7407) (cid:7286)    (cid:7408) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7277) 
(2) (cid:6981)  (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)       (cid:7286)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7021)  ,  
     
(3) (cid:6981)  (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)  / (cid:7390)(cid:7334)/(cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   , (cid:7409)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286)    
(4) (cid:6981)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)     (cid:7407) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408)(cid:7286)
  (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7408) (cid:6981)   -    

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(5)     , (cid:6981)    (cid:7007)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)    
  (cid:7263) (cid:7407) -,   (cid:7298), (cid:7298),       (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)   (cid:7397)

(6) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)      (cid:7277) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7007)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)       (cid:7277)
(cid:7298)
(7) (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)(cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)–  (cid:7272)  (cid:7008)     (cid:7286)  ,  
(cid:7408)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)     (cid:6996)     (cid:7286)     (cid:7408)   (cid:6996) 
  (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990), (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  , (cid:6990) (cid:7004)  (cid:7008) (cid:7408)        (cid:7074)  (cid:7286)
 (cid:7367)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7300)    (cid:7408) 
(8)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)       (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) 
  (cid:7334) (cid:7079)  , (cid:6981)   (cid:7021) (cid:7408)    (cid:6980)     (cid:7011)  (cid:7263) (cid:7286) 
  (cid:7021) (cid:7367)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)     (cid:7019) (cid:7287)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)
  (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7357) (cid:7021)  ,  (cid:7408)   (cid:7349)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408) 
(cid:7079) (cid:7011)  (cid:7263) (cid:7286) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021) (cid:7061) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298), (cid:6990) (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)/(cid:6990)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069), 
(cid:7008),  (cid:7021)(cid:7069), (cid:7298),   (cid:6979)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7407) (cid:7408) 
(9) (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       1500/- (cid:7271) (cid:7408) ,  (cid:6981)  (cid:7275),
(cid:7074) (cid:7275)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7275)  ,  (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7408) 
(10) (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:6996)  (cid:7011) 
7. (cid:6981)  (cid:7004) .—(1) (cid:6981) (cid:7388) (cid:7407)(cid:7334) (cid:7004)  , (cid:6981) :-
(i)   (cid:7019) , (cid:6981)        (cid:6979) (cid:7011) ,  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)    1500
(cid:7271)   (cid:7408)      (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7399)   (cid:7271)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7334)
(cid:7079)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7298),  (cid:7298)   (cid:6979)(cid:7298)       (cid:7409)
 (cid:6981)    ,     (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)   (cid:7298),  “.....” ,
2012      (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7289);
(ii)  (cid:7277) (cid:6979)     (cid:7016)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)      (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)
 ;
(iii)  (cid:7277) (cid:6979)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)       (cid:6979)       (cid:7407)
,         (cid:7408)     (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)    
(cid:6979)    (cid:6980) (cid:7408)  ;
(iv)    (cid:7409) (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:7007)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7004) (cid:7407)        (cid:7008)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7300) 
(cid:6981)   (cid:6981) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:6996) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)     ;
(v)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7298)     (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:6979) , (cid:7007) (cid:7408)  (cid:6991) (cid:7408)(cid:7008)(cid:7277) (cid:7074)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   , (cid:7298)    ,  (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)  
   (cid:6981)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6981)  (cid:7334) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)   (cid:6979)   ;
(vi) (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)   (cid:7407)    (cid:7407)  , (cid:7408) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) 
       (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7408)     (cid:7407)(cid:7312)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)   (cid:7287)  ;
(vii)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7298)         (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)
(cid:7391) , (cid:7408)     (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7391) (cid:7409)  ;
(viii)   (cid:7286)       (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 5
(ix)  (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)   (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)      (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:6981) -
-(cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7079) (cid:7286); 
(x) (cid:7408) (cid:7019)   (cid:6981)-  (cid:7008) (cid:6981),  (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)     -  (cid:6981) ,
   (cid:7286)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7074)     (cid:7074) (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  -
(cid:7298)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  
(cid:7007) 3
  (cid:7016)   (cid:7298)    (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
8.     (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) (cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981).—(1)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7008)
  ,    (cid:7367)   (cid:7021)(cid:7298)   (cid:7013)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)  , 
  (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7277) (cid:7409)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286),  (cid:7408)     (cid:7016) 
  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)    (cid:7409)      (cid:7286)  ,  (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 1 (cid:7286)
 (cid:7409)  (cid:7399) ,  (cid:7277)  ,     (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)     (cid:6981) 
(cid:7061) :
   (cid:7409) (cid:7334)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) ,     (cid:7299)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286)
  -   (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298) (cid:7286),     (cid:7286)    (cid:7019)  ,    (cid:7408)
    (cid:7016)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 1 (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7399) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    (cid:7367) (cid:7408) 
   (cid:7021)(cid:7272) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)       -  (cid:7298)     (cid:7408)
  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)     (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  
(2)    (cid:7016)                 
 (cid:7408)     (cid:7016)    (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7301),  (cid:7004)    :
(i)   -  (cid:6979)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7408)          (cid:6981)   
,  (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)       (cid:7409)     - 
(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ;
(ii)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7408)     , (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7399) 
(cid:7008) (cid:7276)(cid:6981) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385)  ,   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    (cid:7373)   ; 
(iii)             (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7408)    
(cid:7016)     (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     (cid:7016)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7408) 
(3)   (cid:7016)          :
(i)     (cid:7286) (cid:7277)     (cid:7409)     (cid:7016)    (cid:7301) (cid:7286)  
(cid:7277)          (cid:7409)  12 (cid:7409) - (2)     (cid:7408)  
(cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7277)  (cid:7408)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7010) (cid:7408)        (cid:7298)  ,
 (cid:7298)   9    (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7286)       ;
(ii)    ,   (cid:7008)   (cid:7277)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)      (cid:7079) (cid:7277)
;
(iii)       (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   -  (cid:6979)  (cid:7007)   ,    
  (cid:7289)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   (cid:7011)     (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)
 -  (cid:6979)   ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iv)  , (cid:7021), (cid:7334) (cid:7408)(cid:7004) ,     (cid:6979) (cid:7409)     (cid:7008) 
(cid:7011) , (cid:7409) (cid:7019)   ;
(v)     (cid:7021)    (cid:7007) (cid:7277)       (cid:7408)   
(cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)    (cid:7286) (cid:7298)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) ,     (cid:7079)  
(cid:7408)    (cid:7286)      (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)(cid:7079)(cid:7019)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7289)        
-  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7289);
(vi)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7021) (cid:6979)   (cid:7277) ; 
(vii)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7011)       (cid:7079)   
(4)  (cid:7016)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7278) (cid:7286) (cid:7277)  
(5)  (cid:7016)  , (cid:7409)  (cid:7399)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7385)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)
 (cid:7286)    (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 1 (cid:7286)  ,   (cid:6981)    (cid:7299)(cid:7275)
(cid:7011)  (cid:7074)   (cid:7079)(cid:6981),  (cid:7408)     (cid:7016)       -
  (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7019) 
(6) (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7016)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298),  (cid:7016) (cid:7407)(cid:7298), (cid:7407)(cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298), (cid:6981)
 (cid:7021)(cid:7298),    (cid:7079)(cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  - (cid:7298), (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069) 
(cid:7021)(cid:7298),  (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7016) (cid:7312) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7011) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079)
(cid:7272)  (cid:6981) 
(7)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)     , (cid:7286)    (cid:7409) (cid:7019)  ,  -  (cid:6979)
  (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) , (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)   (cid:7016)         , -(cid:7008) 
 (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 2 (cid:7286)  (cid:7074) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  , (cid:7408)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7391) (cid:7409) 

(8) (cid:6996)   (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  - (cid:7298)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)   ,  (cid:7407)(cid:6979), (cid:6981),  (cid:6981) 
(cid:7079)      (cid:7408)     (cid:7016)      (cid:7334)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) 
(cid:7008) (cid:7286)      (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    
(cid:6979) (cid:6980) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  - (cid:7298)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)   (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)   
(9) (cid:6996)     (cid:7408)     (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)
(cid:6979)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7013) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) 
 (cid:7298)     (cid:7074) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7312)  (cid:7011)    
 (cid:7011) 
9.   (cid:7016)        (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) .—(1)    (cid:7016)   
               (cid:7298)    (cid:7367)      
 (cid:7021)(cid:7397)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) 
(2)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  , (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)     (cid:7019) ,  (cid:6981)  
(cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6979) (cid:7021)   (cid:7334)   (cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     
(3)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)    (cid:7409)  83   ,  (cid:6981)     
(cid:7012)(cid:7414) (cid:7408)   ,  (cid:6981)     (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7397)     
     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7019) (cid:6981) / (cid:6981)   (cid:7334) (cid:7287)  
         (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7287) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6979)  (cid:6979)  
(cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7008)-(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7334)   (cid:7407)     (cid:7334) (cid:6979) (cid:7079)  (cid:7286) (cid:6979) ,    (cid:6979)
 (cid:6979)      (cid:6996)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6996) (cid:7286)    (cid:7286)    (cid:7289)
(4)    (cid:7016)             (cid:7286)     (cid:7408)
    (cid:7016)    (cid:6981)   ,  (cid:6981),   (cid:7062)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 7
, (cid:7408),  (cid:7277) (cid:7019) ,  (cid:6981)   (cid:7272) (cid:7408)  (cid:7286), (cid:7408)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7409)   
(5) (cid:7408) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)      (cid:7016)        (cid:7409)  7 (cid:7409) - (2)
  (cid:6981)   (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) 
(6) (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)       (cid:7334)     (cid:7021)      (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)
  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)      (cid:7016)    (cid:7298)   69   
  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:7408) (cid:7334)  (cid:7286)            (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)

(7) (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7079)(cid:7385)   (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)
(cid:7019) 
10. (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)     (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059).—(1)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) 
(cid:7399),  (cid:7010) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408)        (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(cid:7407)(cid:7298), (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298), (cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7011) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:6981),    (cid:7286)   (cid:7407) 
 , (cid:7008) (cid:7286)(cid:6981) (cid:7334)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  17  18   (cid:7407) (cid:7408)     ,(cid:7289)
 (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7289):
(i) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)        (cid:7367)   (cid:7016)
(cid:7408)     (cid:7079)     (cid:7367) -  (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)  ,  
   ;
(ii)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7408)      (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)  ,       ;
(iii)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 3 (cid:7286)   (cid:7007) , (cid:7021), (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7334) (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298) 
(cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286)  (cid:7287)    (cid:7408)        (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) ;

(iv) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 4 (cid:7286)         (cid:7408) (cid:7019)       (cid:7334)     (cid:7021) (cid:7286)
   (cid:7287)  
(2)           (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)    ,  (cid:7408)  (cid:6979)(cid:7385)
 (cid:7409)    (cid:7076) (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 5  (cid:7286)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7407)(cid:6979) 
(cid:7011)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
 
(3)    (cid:7016)       (cid:7408)       (cid:6981)(cid:7407)   (cid:6981) 
(cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7277)      (cid:7409)          (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)           
  (cid:6981)(cid:7385)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7016)      (cid:7079)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7287) 

(4) (cid:7408)  (cid:7016)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)   (cid:7287)  (cid:7408)       (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)
(cid:7277)      (cid:6981),  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) , 1973 (cid:7409)  82        (cid:7021)    (cid:7409)  26
  (cid:7334)  (cid:7407) 
(5) (cid:7408)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286),   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     , 
(cid:7016)     (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)     
(cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7008) (cid:7021) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) , (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)    -
  (cid:6979)    
(6) - (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7062)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7409)    
 (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) ,   (cid:7298) , (cid:7286)  (cid:7272)   (cid:6980) (cid:7277)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7385) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   ,   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     (cid:6981) (cid:7367)     
(7)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7408)     (cid:7286) (cid:6979)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   ,

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:6981)  (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)   (cid:6981),  (cid:7023) , 1872
(1872  1) (cid:7409)  165 (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7275) (cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) , (cid:7408)   (cid:7407)(cid:7079)(cid:7396) (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7312)
   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  
(8)  (cid:7409)  14        (cid:7016)      (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   
     (cid:6981),       - , (cid:7408)      
(cid:7298)       ,     (cid:7286), (cid:7016)  ,  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)    
     (cid:7263) (cid:7298),     (cid:7286) (cid:7005)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)    
(9)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7020)(cid:6981)  (cid:7263)    (cid:6981),      (cid:7407)(cid:7021) 
     (cid:7011) (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  -  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 6 (cid:7286)
 (cid:7409)   (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7382) (cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  (cid:7023)(cid:7298)   
10 . (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981) .—(1) (cid:6981), (cid:7079) (cid:7397)   (cid:7407)  (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)  
(cid:6981)    ; (cid:7408) (cid:7277)  (cid:6981),  (cid:7409)  14  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981) 
(2) (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:6981), (cid:6980)(cid:7298)  - (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312)  (cid:7008) (cid:6980)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)
   , (cid:7008)(cid:7286) (cid:7407) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7340)(cid:7298)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:6979)   
(cid:6980)(cid:7298)   (cid:7011)   , (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)     (cid:6981)     (cid:6981)   
(3) (cid:7079) (cid:6981)     (cid:7299)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) , (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7373)  (cid:7263) 
(4)  (cid:6981),  (cid:7409)  15   (cid:7079) (cid:6981)     (cid:7407)   (cid:7408) (cid:7334)   
(cid:7021)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019)   (cid:6981)          (cid:7409) (cid:7079)     

11.  (cid:7409) (cid:7385).—(1) (cid:7367)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7409)  15 
 (cid:7079) (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)      (cid:6981)     (cid:6981),  (cid:7409)  18 (cid:7286)  (cid:7416)(cid:7397)
  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)     (cid:7407)  
(2)    (cid:7407)   (cid:6981), (cid:6981)    (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)   
(cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 6 (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7020)(cid:7300)   
(3) (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7407)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286),    (cid:7016)      (cid:6981) (cid:7272)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)
     (cid:7408)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)       (cid:7408)     (cid:7407)  -(cid:6981)
   (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7  (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)

(4)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:7393)   (cid:7408) (cid:7408)     (cid:7286)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7008)
(cid:7298)   (cid:7286) ,  (cid:7298) ,(cid:7286) (cid:6981)    (cid:6979) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7407)   , 
(cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7334) (cid:7079) 
(5)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)     (cid:7004)(cid:6981)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7391) (cid:6981)(cid:7334)    
        ,  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:6979)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7409)
(cid:7390)(cid:7021)   (cid:7287)   
(6)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:7263)   -  (cid:6979) 
(cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7287)   ,  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)     , 
(cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 8 (cid:7286)   (cid:7074) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7300)     (cid:6994) (cid:7390)  (cid:7016)
(cid:7391) 
(7) (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 9 (cid:7286)     (cid:6981)  
(8) (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7334)     (cid:7286)      (cid:6981)    (cid:7007) 
(cid:7408)  (cid:7334)        -  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6996)  (cid:6996)  ,  
(cid:7298)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7299)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 9
(9)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)(cid:7334)       - 
(cid:6979)  (cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)       (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)(cid:7334)     (cid:7334)  (cid:7409)
  (cid:7286)  ,   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)       (cid:7408)    (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  , 
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 10 (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:7288) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     (cid:7409)    (cid:6981) 
(10)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7407)(cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7300)   (cid:7277) (cid:7408) , 
 (cid:7286) ,(cid:6981)     (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)        (cid:7409)       
  (cid:7286)  (cid:6979) (cid:7021)   
(11) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286), (cid:7408)    (cid:7286)  (cid:6979) (cid:7021)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)  18 (cid:7409) -
 (1)   () (cid:7286)     (cid:6996) (cid:7277) 
12.     .—(1)  (cid:7409)  16 (cid:7409) - (3)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981), (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 11 (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7004)   '  (cid:7074)'  (cid:7334) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)      (cid:7286) - 
(cid:7378) (cid:7011)     (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 11 (cid:7286) (cid:7016) ' (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)'   ,  (cid:6981)  (cid:7410)(cid:7312)  (cid:7007) (cid:7286) 
:
(i)    (cid:7409) -  (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7409) ;
(ii) ' (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)'  (cid:7021) (cid:6990) (2) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)     ,   (cid:7021) (cid:6990) (1) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)
  (cid:7382)  (cid:7298)
(2) (cid:6981) (cid:7298)   , (cid:7298)   (cid:7004)(cid:7408)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 12 (cid:7286) (cid:7388)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021) :
(i) (cid:6990) (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069);
(ii)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069)
(3)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7286)      (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)
     (cid:7020)  (cid:7016)    (cid:7298)   87   (cid:7407)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
(cid:7079)(cid:7021) 
13.  (cid:7008)   (cid:7079)(cid:7298)    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059).—(1) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)   , 
(cid:7008)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:6989) (cid:7021)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286)    (cid:7409) (cid:7019)    (cid:7334)  (cid:7407)
 
(2)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)     (cid:6981)    (cid:7271)(cid:7373)  (cid:7409)  101 (cid:7409) - (1)  
  (cid:7409)  ,   (cid:7286)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7334)   (cid:6981) 
(3)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7020)(cid:7300)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373)  (cid:7409)  101 (cid:7409) - (2)  
  (cid:7409)  ,   (cid:7286)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7334)   (cid:6981) 
(4)   (cid:7409)  101 (cid:7409) - (2)       (cid:7020)(cid:6981)   (cid:7263)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)
    (cid:7409)  (cid:7019) (cid:7277) ,   (cid:7008),  (cid:7409)  19   (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) 
    
(5)   (cid:7409)  101 (cid:7409) - (2)       (cid:7020)(cid:6981)   (cid:7263)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)
   (cid:7408)  ,   (cid:7008), (cid:6981)         (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)
     
(6)  (cid:7008) (cid:7408) (cid:7020)(cid:6981)  (cid:7263)          (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7272)
(cid:7286)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  
(7)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7019) (cid:7277)     
 (cid:6981) (cid:7021) , :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(i)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)  ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)       
(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)       
(ii)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) , 1973      (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) 
 
(iii) (cid:6981)        (cid:7286) (cid:7409)     (cid:7016)      
 (cid:7408)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:7334) (cid:7272)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7408)  (cid:7277) 
(iv) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)
(cid:6981)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7023) , 1872 (1872  1) (cid:7409)  165 (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7275)
(cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) 
(v)   (cid:7016)    (cid:7409) (cid:6979)          (cid:7008),  
    - , (cid:7408)       (cid:7298)       ,
    (cid:7286), (cid:7016)  ,  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)    ,     (cid:7286) (cid:7005)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)    
(vi)  (cid:7008) (cid:7367) (cid:7407)   (cid:7286),    (cid:7016)      (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7  (cid:7286) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)
    (cid:6981) (cid:7272)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)       (cid:7408)   
 (cid:7407)  -(cid:6981)    (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)
(cid:7021)(cid:6994)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) 
(vii)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7008),  (cid:7409)  18 (cid:7409) - (1)  (2)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7407) 

(8)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)     (cid:7409) (cid:7019) , :
(i)  (cid:7008), (cid:7074) (cid:7008)(cid:7298) (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) , 1973 (cid:7367) (cid:7416)(cid:7397) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)    
     
(ii)  (cid:7008) (cid:7367) (cid:7407)   (cid:7286),    (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7  (cid:7286) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:6981) (cid:7272) 
(cid:7013)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)       (cid:7408)     (cid:7407)  -(cid:6981) 
  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)

(iii)     (cid:7286) (cid:7385)   ,    (cid:7333)(cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:6979) (cid:7021)   

(iv)   (cid:6979) (cid:7021)     (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7016)    (cid:7407)(cid:6979)     (cid:6979)
    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 13 (cid:7286) (cid:7414) (cid:6979)   (cid:7407)(cid:7288)  (cid:7008)   
(v)  (cid:7008) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:6981)(cid:7008)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7021) (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7312) 
(cid:6981)   (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7272)      (cid:7286)         (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) 
 (cid:7287)   
(vi)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7333)(cid:7409) (cid:6981)     (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)       (cid:7008):
()  (cid:7016)     -(cid:6981)  (cid:7408) (cid:7286) (cid:7004)    (cid:7289)  (cid:7277)  (cid:6989) 
   (cid:7021)   
() (cid:7408) (cid:7019) (cid:7263)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)     (cid:6979)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) 
 (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7300)     (cid:7408) (cid:7021) (cid:7390)(cid:7021) (cid:6981)(cid:7385)     
(cid:7287)  
() (cid:7016)    (cid:7008):

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 11
()   ;
() (cid:6994) (cid:7390)    (cid:7079)     (cid:7079)   (cid:7020)(cid:7408)   ;
()     (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7004) (cid:7390)      (cid:7374)(cid:7019)  (cid:6979),
(cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979), (cid:7079)(cid:6979), , (cid:6981)  (cid:7008) (cid:7004) (cid:7300)   (cid:7286) (cid:7287)  ;
()      (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7416)(cid:7397)     (cid:7079) (cid:7334)
  (cid:6981)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7079) (cid:7334) (cid:7408) ,   (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)
   (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286) 
(vii)    - (vi) () ()  (cid:7079)   :
() (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   (cid:7079)
(cid:7334) (cid:7408)   
()   (cid:6979)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7008) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079) (cid:7334) (cid:7408)     
  (cid:7367)(cid:7414) (cid:7378)   (cid:7008)   
()       (cid:7286) (cid:6979)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7287)  (cid:7298)  
(cid:7079)    (cid:7079)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)    (cid:7021) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  
 (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:7009)    (cid:7008)  
()   (cid:7385)    (cid:7079)     (cid:6979) (cid:7278) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   (cid:7286)
(cid:7407)(cid:7286) 
()     ,    (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7275)    (cid:6981)(cid:7275)  (cid:7298)  
 (cid:7263)  ,      (cid:7298)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6979)  
() (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019) (cid:7277)     (cid:7079)
(cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7021) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7008)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7385) (cid:7408)
        (cid:7287)  
()      (cid:7079) (cid:7367)     (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   
(cid:7008) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7287) (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7079)
 (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7008)  ,  (cid:7408)   (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) 
14.  (cid:7298)  (cid:7397) (cid:7408) .—  (cid:7016)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) -(cid:7373)   (cid:7298) 
 (cid:7409)  (cid:7385)    (cid:6981),    ,  (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)      (cid:7008)(cid:7286)
(cid:7021) (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7008) (cid:7367) (cid:7397) (cid:7408) :
  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7286)   (cid:7409)  19 (cid:7409) - (1)   (i)     
 (cid:7016)   ,    (cid:7409) -(cid:7373)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)   
(cid:7007) 4
 (cid:7016) 
15.  (cid:7016)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) .—(1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)       (cid:7298), 
 (cid:6996)  (cid:7367) (cid:7074) (cid:7286)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408) 
(2)   (cid:7007)(cid:6979)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7334)  (cid:7298)   87     (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)
(cid:7409) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(3) (cid:7007)(cid:6979)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7289) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)(cid:7286) (cid:6979), (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005)  (cid:7016) (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) 
 (cid:6981)       (cid:6981)       (cid:6980)  (cid:7391)(cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6980)
     (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7061)   (cid:7018)    (cid:7275) (cid:7008)   
(4)     (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7334)   (cid:7074) ,  (cid:7408)  (cid:7277) (cid:7298)
(5)     (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7334) (cid:7409)     (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  89   (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408)

(6) (cid:7007)(cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7408)   (cid:6996)       (cid:7407)   (cid:7004)(cid:7074)   (cid:7289)
16.     (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059).—(1)   (cid:7007)(cid:6979)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)    (cid:7275), (cid:7074) (cid:7275)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7275) (cid:7408)
,  (cid:6996)  (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7408)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7275) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    1500 (cid:7271)   (cid:7277) 
(2)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7378)    (cid:7021)     (cid:7409)   
(3)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)      (cid:7408) (cid:7021)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)
        (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7334) (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) 
(4)   (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7074)       (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  ,    
  
(5)   (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   , (cid:7409) (cid:7021)
(cid:7286)   
(6)       (cid:7021) (cid:7408) (cid:7004)   (cid:6980)     (cid:7011)     (cid:7021) (cid:7367)
(cid:7019) (cid:7287)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7007)(cid:6979) 
 (cid:7021)(cid:7298)   (cid:7357) (cid:7021)  ,  (cid:7408)   (cid:7349)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408) (cid:7011) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)  
(cid:7298), (cid:6990) (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)/(cid:6990)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069),  (cid:7008),  (cid:7021)(cid:7069), (cid:6981),   (cid:6979)   
(cid:7408)    (cid:7407) (cid:7408) 
(7)   (cid:6981)(cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)–  (cid:7272)       (cid:7286)  ,
  (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)      (cid:6996)     (cid:7286)     (cid:7408) :
 (cid:6996)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990),   (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  -, (cid:6990) (cid:7004)  (cid:7008) (cid:7408)  
     (cid:7074) (cid:7286)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)     
(8)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   , (cid:7408) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  (cid:7298) (cid:7408)   (cid:7298) 
  (cid:6979)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  , ,   (cid:7298)  (cid:7263)    (cid:7021)      (cid:7298)
   (cid:7021)     
(9)     ,   (cid:7021)    (cid:7007)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286)
(10)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7008) (cid:6979)   (cid:7277)
(cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021)    (cid:7408)    -    
(11)    (cid:7263)   (cid:7277)     ,  (cid:7408) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)      (cid:7298)  
 (cid:7277) (cid:7298)
(12) (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)     (cid:6981) (cid:7011)  
17.   (cid:7407)(cid:7334) (cid:7004)  (cid:7004) (cid:7004) .— (cid:7409)  30    (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7004) (cid:7004)   (cid:7407)(cid:7334),
   (cid:7374)(cid:7019)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385)     (cid:7004)  ,   (cid:7079) (cid:7298):

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 13
(i)     (cid:7286) (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     - (cid:7021)      (cid:7021)
 (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 15 (cid:7286) ;
(ii)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)   (cid:7407)    (cid:7407) , (cid:7408) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)
        (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7408)     (cid:7407)(cid:7312)    (cid:7021)(cid:7069)    (cid:7367)
(cid:7408) ;
(iii)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)    (cid:7407) (cid:7286)       (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)
 (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7391) , (cid:7408) (cid:7334)    (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7391) (cid:7409) 
;
(iv)   (cid:7286)        (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) ;
(v) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7263)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 16 (cid:7286) (cid:7298)   
(cid:7021)(cid:7272),  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)     (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7011)    (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  ;
(vi)  (cid:7277) (cid:7019) ,     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)      (cid:7298) 
(cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286)  ;
(vii) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)  :
() (cid:7408) (cid:7408) (cid:7373) (cid:7298)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7397)    (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  
(cid:7298) (cid:7409)      ;
()   (cid:6979)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7397)       (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  
  (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7011)   (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  ;
() (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7020);
() (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7298)  -  ;
(.) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   (cid:7334)  (cid:7408)  ;
() (cid:7079) (cid:7286)         ;
() (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   -   (cid:7286)   ;
() (cid:7408) (cid:7008)      (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7263) ;
() ,   (cid:7286) (cid:7278) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  ;
() (cid:7391)(cid:7278)   (cid:7286)   ;
()   (cid:6979) ;
()  (cid:7409) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:7298)  ;
() (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7263)    (cid:7074);
() (cid:7008)    (cid:7021), (cid:7409)   (cid:7019) 
(viii)     (vii) (cid:7286) (cid:7373) (cid:7021)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7010) (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7007) 5
   (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)     (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
18.   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) .—(1)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6981)-     
(cid:7021)    (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)-   (cid:7357) (cid:7021)     (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408) :
      (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  ,  (cid:7021)    (cid:7263)     
(cid:7021)  
(2)        (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ,  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 17 (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) , (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)
(cid:7286)     (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7016) (cid:7408) 
(3) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)   ,  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7272)  (cid:7021)(cid:7021) ,     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)   (cid:6981)
(cid:7286)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)         (cid:7409)     (cid:7407)(cid:6981)      (cid:7408)(cid:7004)
(cid:7272)  (cid:7021)(cid:7021)       (cid:7079)(cid:7074)     (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) 
(4)   -(cid:6981)        -  (cid:6979)       (cid:6979) 
 (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  ,           (cid:7286)            (cid:7409)
 (cid:7286)    (cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7334) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)    (cid:7287)   
(5)   (cid:6981)(cid:7018)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)     (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 18  (cid:7286) 
(6)   (cid:6981)(cid:7018)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7004) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)
(cid:7019)        (cid:7286)
(7) (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)        (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)      (cid:7409) (cid:7407) (cid:6979) (cid:7079)  
 (cid:7286)          (cid:7408)     (cid:7286)   (cid:6981)     
(8)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)        (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:6981)  ,  -, (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)
(cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)      (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 19 (cid:7286)   (cid:7263)  -, (cid:6979)  (cid:7334) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272)
20 (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)(cid:6979)    
(9)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)       ,   (cid:6981)     (cid:7016)
(cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 18 (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)    (cid:7021)    -, (cid:6979)    
(cid:7011)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)       (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)   (cid:6979)     
19.  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059).—(1)   (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  ,   
     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)   
(2) (cid:7408) (cid:7019) (cid:7263)   (cid:7409)  94     (cid:6981)       (cid:7407) 
(cid:7391)   (cid:7374)(cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7397)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7407) 
(3)      (cid:6979)   ,   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 21 (cid:7286)   (cid:7007)    (cid:7409)  36 (cid:7409) -
 (2)    (cid:7008)      (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7016)
  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)(cid:7079)(cid:7385) -   (cid:7301)
(4)  (cid:7334) (cid:6981)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)    (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7 (cid:7286)    (cid:7287)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   
  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7409)    (cid:7390)(cid:7334)      (cid:6981)(cid:7275), 
(cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7019) (cid:7312)      (cid:6981) (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7374)(cid:7019)   (cid:7409) 
(5)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7414) (cid:7008)   (cid:7373)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7414)      -  (cid:6979) (cid:7409) -
(cid:7079)(cid:7385)  (cid:7391)       (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7407)(cid:7332)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7272) 
(cid:7298)   (cid:7007) (cid:7286)       (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7016) (cid:7408) 
(6)           -   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)   
 (cid:7011)(cid:7298)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)  (cid:7004)(cid:7013)   (cid:7263)   (cid:7011)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7277) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 15
(7)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 19      (cid:7299)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7334)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:6981)    (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7004)
(cid:7407)(cid:7300)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7397) 
(8)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) -    (cid:7016)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408) 
  (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 22     (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7021)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7021)  
   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:6989)   (cid:7407)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:6981)    (cid:7299)(cid:7275)   (cid:7286)

(9)   (cid:6981)(cid:7334)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:6981)         -  (cid:6979) 
(cid:6981)    
(10)   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)    , (cid:7286) (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7407)(cid:7288),  (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981),
 (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)((cid:7288))     (cid:7286)  (cid:7367) (cid:7407)   (cid:7298)
(11)  (cid:6981)      (cid:7298) (cid:7286),     (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)     
 15 (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  
(cid:7016)    (cid:7021) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  
(12)  (cid:6981)      (cid:7298) (cid:7286),    (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)    (cid:6979), (cid:7390)
(cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7004)(cid:7408)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7287)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7021)   ,      
(13)   (cid:7409)        (cid:7408)  (cid:7021) (cid:7367)   (cid:7408) (cid:6981)  (cid:6981),  (cid:7409)
  (cid:7286) (cid:7408) 
(14) (cid:7408)      , (cid:7007)(cid:6979)      (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7007)(cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7007)(cid:6979) (cid:7367)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)     (cid:7021) (cid:7021) 
(15)     (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)      - (cid:7407) (cid:7277) 
(16)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:6996)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:7414) (cid:7408)  ,     (cid:6979) 
 (cid:6979) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385)   (cid:7287)  ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7275) (cid:7079)(cid:7074)    (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:6981)(cid:7298)
  (cid:7074)  (cid:6981) , (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:6996)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:6994)   (cid:6981)
,     
(17)      ,    (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7021)
 (cid:7408) -   (cid:7016)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7 (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     

(18)      ,     (cid:7409)      (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  
(cid:6981) (cid:7409)         (cid:7409)    (cid:7286)          (cid:6981)   
,   (cid:7334) ,    (cid:7286)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)   
(19)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   ,        (cid:7409)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   
  (cid:7409)   ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)    
(cid:7407) (cid:7408) 
(20) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)    (cid:7409)    (cid:7407)    (cid:7367)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)
 (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:6981)(cid:7008)  (cid:6981)       (cid:7286)
   (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)--(cid:7021)  (cid:7367)  
(21)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7367) (cid:7407)    (cid:7409)    
 (cid:7007)  (cid:7263)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7408) 
(22)   -  (cid:6979)  (cid:7409)  35 (cid:7409) - (1)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7012)(cid:7414)  ,
  -  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 23 (cid:7286)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286)  -  (cid:6979) (cid:6979) 
(cid:7008) (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   ,   (cid:7286)    (cid:7079) (cid:7367) (cid:7011)    

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 (cid:7278)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7008) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7012)(cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 24   (cid:7020)(cid:7408) (cid:7408)

(23)   (cid:7409)  35 (cid:7409) - 3    (cid:7062)(cid:6981)   (cid:7012)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)(cid:7298)
(cid:7409)  (cid:7385)    (cid:7012)(cid:7414)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:7272)  (cid:7334)  
(24)   (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)    (cid:7286)    -  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)      (cid:7079)  
    , (cid:7408)  (cid:7373)    (cid:7408)       (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334) , (cid:7409)      (cid:7277)  
     (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:7272)  (cid:7334)  
(25)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7263) (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)      (cid:7286), 
   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) ((cid:7074)   (cid:7019)   ) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 17 (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)
   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)        (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7011) (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) 
(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7263)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7286) (cid:7367)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)   
(cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7409) 
(26)   (cid:7409)  36            (cid:7016) (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)  
 (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 18 (cid:7286)  
(27)    (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)   (cid:7011)    (cid:7263),  (cid:7391)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)
 (cid:7408) (cid:6989) (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)       
(28)   (cid:7298)         (cid:7299)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7008) -  
(cid:6979)((cid:7298))     (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385)     (cid:7275)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)   (cid:7011) 
 (cid:7390) (cid:7407)  (cid:7398) -(cid:7074)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7287)  
(29)    (cid:7298)       (cid:7407)(cid:7004)(cid:7334)     (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:7272) 
(cid:7334)     (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 25 (cid:7286)      (cid:7079)  
(30)    -      ,    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:7298)   82 
 
20. (cid:7298)    .—(1)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   '  (cid:7074)'   (cid:7408) (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)   
 (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7074) (cid:7021) (cid:7408)     (cid:7074) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 26 (cid:7286)  (cid:7334) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)
 (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)      (cid:7286) -  (cid:7378) (cid:7011)     (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 26 (cid:7286) (cid:7016)
' (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)'   ,  (cid:6981)  (cid:7410)(cid:7312)   (cid:7408) :
(i)    (cid:7409) -  (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7409) ;
(ii) ' (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)'  (cid:7021) (cid:6990) (2) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)     ,   (cid:7021) (cid:6990) (1) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)
  (cid:7382)  (cid:7298)
(2)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)    (cid:7021)(cid:7069)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 16 (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) 
(3)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)   (cid:6979)    (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7007)(cid:6979)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)      (cid:7020)  (cid:7016)     (cid:7298)   87   (cid:7407)
   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) 
(cid:7007) 6
 (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)  
21.    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069)   .—(1)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)    (cid:7016) 
 (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)      (cid:7021) (cid:7312),   (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  (cid:7367) 
  (cid:7298),   (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409) - (1)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7408) ,    (cid:7021) (cid:7004) (cid:7079)(cid:7275) (cid:7408)
(cid:7008)    (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:6980)(cid:7385)-(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7298)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 17
(2)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7298), -(cid:7298), -(cid:6980), (cid:7074) , (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) , (cid:7008)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) ,
  (cid:7300)  -(cid:7074), (cid:7021) (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7004)(cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 27 (cid:7286)    (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) -(cid:7373)     (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)   
(cid:7390) (cid:6981)   (cid:7088)   (cid:7286) (cid:7385)   (cid:7286)    (cid:6996)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7286) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)
 (cid:7367)   (cid:7286) (cid:7277)   ;
(3) (cid:6996)   (cid:7004)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979), (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005),
(cid:6979),   (cid:7088) (cid:7312), (cid:7390) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  ,(cid:7289)  (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409)
- (1)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7079) (cid:7074) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 28 (cid:7286)   
(4)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)      (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7385)     (cid:7298),  (cid:6996)   (cid:7021)(cid:7069) 
(cid:7277)    (cid:6996)   (cid:7079)(cid:7385)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7385)        (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)
 (cid:7021) (cid:7069)    (cid:7074) (cid:7277) 
(5) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)    (cid:6981)   (cid:6996)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7005)(cid:7298)    :
(i) (cid:7004) (cid:7079)(cid:7275) (cid:7408)      (cid:7021) (cid:7069);
(ii)  ,    (cid:7312), (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  -,  (cid:7312)  (cid:7011);
(iii)  (cid:7409) (cid:7275) (cid:7021)    (cid:7300)    -(cid:6979)    (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  ;
(iv) (cid:7021)  (cid:7334) (cid:7088)    (cid:7074)   (cid:7016);
(v)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004), (cid:7390), (cid:6979) , (cid:6981) (cid:7004)(cid:7408)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)
   (cid:7021)(cid:7312)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:7312)  (cid:7011) ;
(vi) (cid:6979), (cid:6979)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021);
(vii)  (cid:7367)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7312)  (cid:7011);
(viii) (cid:7298)  (cid:7019)-(cid:7407)  (cid:7079)    (cid:7008) , -, (cid:7299)  (cid:7008) 
(cid:7286)(cid:7298)   (cid:7410)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7011);
(ix)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7312)     (cid:7011);
(x)        (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:7011) (cid:7298)  (cid:7011), (cid:7408)  ;
(xi) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) -(cid:7373)     (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7390) (cid:6981)  
(cid:7088)   (cid:7286) (cid:7385)   (cid:7286) ;
(xii) (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)    (cid:7008)  
(6)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7408)  ,  (cid:6996)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)    (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409) -
(1)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069)   (cid:7312), (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298),       (cid:7298) (cid:7286) -(cid:6981)(cid:7407)  ,
(cid:6979), (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) (cid:7312)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7021)    (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7414) (cid:6979) 
(7) (cid:7408) (cid:6979)  (cid:7414) (cid:6979)   (cid:6980)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407)  , (cid:6979), (cid:6981)
 (cid:6981) (cid:7312)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7298)       (cid:6981)(cid:7385) ,(cid:7289)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7021) 
(cid:7079)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7409)              (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:6979)  (cid:7414)
(cid:6979) (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)      (cid:7408) (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7397)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:7265)  (cid:7374)    (cid:7334)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409) - (1)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021) (cid:7277) 


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(8)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021)     (cid:7334)  (cid:7286) -(cid:6981)(cid:7407)   (cid:7286)
(cid:7021) (cid:7069)          (cid:7021)(cid:7069)   (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7334) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:6996)  
 (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)       (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409) - (1)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)(cid:7407) (cid:7408) 
(9)  (cid:7021)(cid:7312)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7409)  (cid:7385)     (cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)      
(cid:6981)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7409)  (cid:7385)    (cid:7021) (cid:7069)      (cid:7277)  
,(cid:7289)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409) - (1)     - (8)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021) (cid:7277)
 
(10) (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)         (cid:7079)(cid:7385)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408)

(11) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)     (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:7414) (cid:6979)    (cid:7408) ,  (cid:6981)
   (cid:7408)  
(12) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:7374)   
  (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)      (cid:6996)(cid:7298)   (cid:6996) (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7286) 
22. (cid:7334) (cid:7088)  .—(1) (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  - (cid:7298)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7021) 

(2) (cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6994)    (cid:7334) (cid:7088)       (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  
(cid:6996)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 27 (cid:7286)   (cid:7286)
(3)  (cid:7334) (cid:7088)   (cid:7409) (cid:7019) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)
(cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7287)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7286),  (cid:7021)  (cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7004)  (cid:7019)
(cid:7008)  (cid:6981)      (cid:7390)(cid:7334)   (cid:7334) (cid:7088)     (cid:7408)   
(4) (cid:7334) (cid:7088) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069),  (cid:7409)  41 (cid:7409) - (1)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 28 (cid:7286) (cid:7408) 
(5) (cid:7334) (cid:7088) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   (cid:7312) (cid:7286) ,     (cid:7312)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)
(cid:7334)    (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7408)        (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)
(6) (cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)    (cid:7408) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:7340) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)      (cid:7286) ,
  (cid:7409) , (cid:7401)  ,       
(7)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7286)   (cid:7408) (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)    (cid:6979)  
        (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)        (cid:7334) (cid:7298)     (cid:6979)
(cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7408)   
(8) (cid:7334) (cid:7088)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7277) (cid:7286)
(9) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7334) (cid:7088)       (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 29 (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) 
   
23.    .—(1) (cid:6996)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)      (cid:7007)  (cid:6979)(cid:7385)
 (cid:7021)              (cid:7286)  
(2) (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)     (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008)     (cid:6979)   (cid:7079) 
(3) (cid:7408)       (cid:7286)      (cid:6981)  (cid:7367)    (cid:6981)   
-(cid:6981)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)   44  - (1) (cid:7286) (cid:7016) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)     (cid:7286)   
 (cid:7408)       ,  (cid:6981)     (cid:7298)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7286)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 19
(4)  (cid:7286)       (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 31 (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) 
 (cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)        (cid:7286)     (cid:7408)   
(5)       (cid:7021)(cid:7272)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)      (cid:7409)  
(cid:7407)(cid:7332)   (cid:7007) (cid:7286)  (cid:7263) (cid:7409)       (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)        (cid:7408)

(6)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019)(cid:7312)       (cid:7016)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7016)  
  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7277) 
(7) (cid:6981)     (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)          (cid:7079)   -
        (cid:7390)(cid:7021)    (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) 
   (cid:7367) -     
(8) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7407) (cid:7286)     (cid:7008) (cid:7079)  (cid:7263), (cid:7408)       
(cid:7008) -      (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
(9)       (cid:7286)       (cid:6979)   (cid:7007)   (cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 30 (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7385) 
(10)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7407)      (cid:7286)     (cid:7408) 
,   (cid:7408)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  (cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7334)  (cid:6981) (cid:7408)      
(cid:7390)(cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7298)
(11)      (cid:7286)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)   (cid:7286)     (cid:7079)   (cid:7298) 
   (cid:7277) 
(12)  (cid:7407)       (cid:6979)    (cid:7298)   ,   (cid:7079) (cid:7298) :
(i)  -  (cid:7407)  ;
(ii)  -         (cid:6994)  ;
(iii)  - (cid:7409)  (cid:7289) (cid:6981)       (cid:7407), (cid:7004)   (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005) (cid:7275)
 ;
(iv)    - (cid:7409)     (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7414)  (cid:7286);
(v)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)   (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7407)(cid:7288) (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7286) (cid:7022)
(cid:7013)  (), (cid:7408) ()   (cid:7407)  (cid:7004)(cid:7408)  ,(cid:7289) (cid:7408)  (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) 
(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7272)  (cid:7021)(cid:7021)  (cid:7289)
(vi)  (cid:7407)   (cid:6981)(cid:7385) (cid:7021)     
(13)   (cid:6979)       (cid:7390)(cid:7021)      (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)  
:
(i)     (cid:7390)(cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069) ;
(ii)  (cid:7367) (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008) (cid:7079) (cid:7408) ;
(iii) (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) ; 
(iv) (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)(cid:7385) (cid:7021)   
(14)  (cid:7407)     (cid:7390)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:6996)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(15)        (cid:7286)     (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 32 (cid:7286) (cid:7407) , (cid:7286)    
  (cid:7286)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7416)(cid:7397) (cid:7409) 
(16)  (cid:7407)       (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)       (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 33  (cid:7286) 
(cid:7021)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)
(17)   (cid:6979)      (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 34 (cid:7286) 
(18)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)       (cid:7079)(cid:7312)   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 35 (cid:7286) , (cid:7408) (cid:7409)
 (cid:7391) (cid:7409)  
(19)  (cid:7407)       (cid:7079) (cid:7388) (cid:7079) (cid:7286):
(i) (cid:6981)(cid:7385) , (cid:7403), (cid:7088)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079) ;
(ii)   (cid:7061) (cid:7407), (cid:7004)   (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005)    ,   (cid:7011) ;
(iii) , (cid:7390) (cid:6981), (cid:6979), (cid:6979)  (cid:7271)   (cid:6979) (cid:7391) ;
(iv)    (cid:7334) , (cid:7353)(cid:7275) (cid:6981)(cid:7298),  (cid:7408) , , (cid:7004), ,  (cid:7004)(cid:7408) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7011) ;
(v)  (cid:7409) (cid:7271)   (cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7011) ;
(vi)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7407)  (cid:6979)      (cid:7021) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409) 
       (cid:6981)-  (cid:7408)  (cid:6979)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079) (cid:7277) (cid:7409) ;
(vii)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)       (cid:7407)    (cid:7409)   ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7019)
  (cid:7334)  (cid:7407)  ;
(viii)   (cid:7299)(cid:7275)   (cid:7007) (cid:7286)  (cid:7263)   (cid:6981)      (cid:7407)    (cid:6981);
(ix)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)  -       (cid:7407)  (cid:7079)    
-(cid:6981)     (cid:7287)      (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) ; 
(x)  (cid:7391)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:6980) , (cid:7286) , (cid:7349) (cid:7409) (cid:7312) (cid:7286)       
(cid:7409) (cid:7312) (cid:7409)       
24. (cid:7079).—(1) (cid:6996)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  , (cid:7286) (cid:7388)    (cid:7289):
(i) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7079);
(ii)  (cid:7079);
(iii)  (cid:7079);
(iv) (cid:7079)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  ; 
(v) (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  
(2)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7008) (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)   (cid:6994)
(cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7011) 
(3)   (cid:7286) (cid:6979), (cid:7408)(cid:7004) , , (cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7004)(cid:7408)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7021)(cid:7272) 
 (cid:7079)(cid:7298)  (cid:7373) (cid:7408) 
(4)   (cid:6979)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 21
(5) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) (cid:7021)-(cid:7079)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7385)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7079) (cid:7286)  
   (cid:7286),       (cid:7004) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:6989)   (cid:7409)     (cid:7079) (cid:7011)  
   (cid:7079) (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 36 (cid:7286) (cid:7407)  (cid:7286)
(6)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)     
       (cid:6979)   (cid:7289)     (cid:7289)  (cid:7286) (cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(7) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     (cid:6981)   (cid:7277) 
25. (cid:7021)         (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)  .—(1)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    
   (cid:7021)(cid:7312)     ,  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  , (cid:7008)(cid:7286)   (cid:6991)   
 (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)      (cid:7008) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021) (cid:7011)    (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:6996) 
 
(2)    (cid:7021)     (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 37 
   (cid:7333)(cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:7004) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7333)(cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)       (cid:6981) 
(cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  
(3)   (cid:6979)  (cid:6979), (cid:7408)(cid:7004) , , (cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7004)(cid:7408)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  
(cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:7079)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298), (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)          (cid:6981) 
      (cid:7021)(cid:7312)    (cid:7286)     
(4) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7334) (cid:7391)      
 (cid:6981)        (cid:7367)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)          (cid:7286) 
(cid:7409) (cid:7019)     (cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(5) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) (cid:6981)(cid:7334) (cid:7391)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7409)
(cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7409)     (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059)    (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)   ,
     (cid:7079) (cid:7409)      (cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7272)  (cid:7367) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  
(cid:7286)
(6) (cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7019) (cid:7300)    (cid:7011) ; 
   (cid:7289) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(7) (cid:7391)(cid:7278)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7388)   (cid:7408)  :
(i)    (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)     ;
(ii) (cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:7275)  (cid:7340) (cid:6979)   (cid:7074)(cid:7275)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)     
  ;
(iii) (cid:7398)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059),   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996) (cid:7298)   (cid:7008) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)
  (cid:7004)(cid:7408)   (cid:7008)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:6996) (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021)
;
(iv)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7312)   (cid:7286) -(cid:6981)       (cid:7272)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)
  (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  ;
(v) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)  (cid:7004) (cid:7007) (cid:7011)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  
  (cid:6981)(cid:7004) (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  ;
(vi) (cid:7391)(cid:7004)(cid:7278)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7378) (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7409)
(cid:7390)(cid:7021); 
(vii) (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)       (cid:7008) (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7004) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
26.    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7079)   .—(1)    (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7004)(cid:7298), (cid:7298), (cid:6981)-
   (cid:7298)    (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  ,  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7088)   (cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(2)    (cid:7021)  (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7074)  (cid:7061) (cid:6981)(cid:6979)   (cid:7298),     (cid:7298)
(cid:7409)  (cid:6979)(cid:7312)    (cid:7367)  (cid:7397) (cid:7004)  (cid:7013)(cid:7407) (cid:7407) 
(3) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7088) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)    (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7409)   (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7373)   (cid:7286)  (cid:6990)  
(4) (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)    (cid:7079)  (cid:6981) (cid:7334) (cid:7409) 
(5)    (cid:7021)     (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7408)     (cid:7373)  (cid:7263)   (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)    
(cid:7390) (cid:6981)   (cid:7088)        (cid:7286) (cid:7385)      (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) 
     
(6)   (cid:7004)     (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7334) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)     (cid:6981) 
(7)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)     (cid:7079) (cid:7298):
(cid:7059).. (cid:7414)/(cid:6981) (cid:7407) (cid:6990) 
1. (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) ((cid:6979)) 1
2. (cid:7407)(cid:6979) / (cid:7016) / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) 3
(- )
(cid:7408)  (cid:7016)   (cid:6981)--(cid:7021)
  (cid:7408)  
3. (cid:6981)/(cid:6980)/ (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005) (cid:6980) 2
4.  /  4
5. (cid:6979)/(cid:7351) 2 ()
6. (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  ((cid:7408)(cid:7004)) 1 (  )
7. (cid:6981)-(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:6981)/(cid:7021) (cid:6981)/(cid:7418) (cid:6981)  1
8. (cid:7021) (cid:7409)-- 1
9.   (cid:7016)  (cid:6981) (cid:7007) 1 ()
10.   (cid:6979)-- (cid:7079)(cid:6979) 1 ()
11.  2
12.  2
13.  (cid:7409)(cid:7410) 2
14.   1
15.  1 ()
(8)  (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7312)    ,  (cid:7021)(cid:7312)   (cid:7286) (cid:7019) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)
(cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
(9)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)(cid:7272)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990), -(cid:6981), (cid:7407)   (cid:7021),  (cid:7409)
(cid:7088)    (cid:7333)   (cid:7021) (cid:7409)   (cid:7007) (cid:7286)  (cid:7263) (cid:6979) (cid:7414)  (cid:7408) 
(10) (cid:7334)   (cid:7408)   (cid:6979) (cid:7414)   (cid:7298)     (cid:6981)(cid:7385) (cid:7272)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) 
 (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)-  (cid:6981) (cid:7298)  (cid:7275) (cid:7414)  (cid:7021)(cid:6981)    (cid:7007)  (cid:7298)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 23
(11) (cid:6979) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)   (cid:7403)   (cid:7286) (cid:7277) (cid:7298) (cid:7408)   (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  , (cid:7410)     (cid:7298) 
(cid:7021)    ,     (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7382) (cid:7298)
27. (cid:7334)  .—(1) (cid:6981)     (cid:7408) -  (cid:7367)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   
 (cid:7079)(cid:7385)      (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008) (cid:7079) (cid:7286),   (cid:7408)    (cid:7079) (cid:7397) (cid:7079)
        (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:7021) (cid:7272)  (cid:6994) 
(2) (cid:7008)      (cid:7298), -(cid:7298), -(cid:6980), (cid:7074) , (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) , (cid:7008)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)
,   (cid:7300)  -(cid:7074), (cid:7021)   (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7004)(cid:7408)
(cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 38 (cid:7286)   
(3) (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)    :
(i)  (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7414) ;
(ii)         (cid:7079) ;
(iii)     (cid:7408)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7059)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7390) (cid:6981) (cid:7277) 
 ; 
(iv) (cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7407)  (cid:7298)   
(4) (cid:6981)    (cid:7391)     (cid:6979)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  
 (cid:6979)    (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005), (cid:6979),   (cid:7088) (cid:7312), (cid:7390) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7289)   (cid:7011) (cid:7008) (cid:7061)       (cid:7021)    (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 39 (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7286):
  (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)       (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7408)     (cid:7373)  (cid:7263)   (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)
   (cid:7390) (cid:6981)   (cid:7088)        (cid:7286) (cid:7385)   
(5) (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7008)     (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)(cid:7385)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7076) (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)
 (cid:7286) (cid:7286)
(6) (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7300) (cid:7409)    ,    
- (4)      (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:7408)  
(7) (cid:7408) (cid:6981)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409)      (cid:6979),    (cid:7286)  (cid:7312),    
(cid:7008)-(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7021)    (cid:7079)    (cid:7397)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7409)  54   (cid:7334) (cid:7409)  (cid:6979) 
(cid:7409) (cid:7408) (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7408)      (cid:7367) (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021) 
 (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7397)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:7265)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)     
(cid:7298)   (cid:7334)  (cid:7277) (cid:7286) 
(8)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:7265)    ,   (cid:7005) (cid:7409)   (cid:7008),
 (cid:7408)      (cid:6979)       (cid:7021)       (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)
    (cid:7008) (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7334)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)(cid:7407) (cid:7408) 
(9) (cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7312) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)     (cid:7008),  (cid:7408)  
   (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)    
(10) (cid:7408) (cid:7021)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298)   (cid:7334)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008) (cid:7079) (cid:7409) ,  (cid:7408) 
(cid:7079) (cid:7298):
(i) (cid:7016)  ;
(ii) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)      ;
(iii) (cid:7391)(cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005)  ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iv) -(cid:7334)  (cid:6981);
(v) (cid:6979);
(vi) (cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   ;
(vii)  (cid:6979); 
(viii)     
(11) (cid:7334)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     (cid:7079) (cid:7298):
(i) , (cid:7403), , (cid:7021)(cid:6994)  -;
(ii) (cid:6981)   (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005) (cid:6981);
(iii) (cid:7079)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7286) ;
(iv)  (cid:6979)   (cid:6979)     (cid:7334) (cid:7407) (cid:6979)    (cid:6979); 
(v) , ,     (cid:6981)
(12) (cid:7408)   (cid:7334)  (cid:7286)      ,   (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) 
(cid:7334) (cid:7079) 
28. (cid:6989) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) : (1)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7019)     (cid:7408) (cid:6994)    , (cid:6979)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7272)  
   (cid:6989)  , (cid:6981)   (cid:7367)  (cid:6989) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)   
(2) (cid:6981)   (cid:6994)      (cid:7409) , (cid:7013) , (cid:6980), (cid:7018)  (cid:6981) , (cid:6994) (cid:7298)   (cid:7018)  
  (cid:7409) (cid:6994)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)    (cid:6980)      (cid:7079)(cid:7298)   (cid:6989) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) 
(cid:7272) (cid:7286)    :
   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:7408)     (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)     (cid:6981) 
 (cid:7088)    (cid:7407)(cid:7074)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7286) (cid:6991)  (cid:7277)  
(3) (cid:6981)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7004)    ,   (cid:7277)  ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    
 (cid:7004)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7019)  (cid:7408) (cid:6994)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)   (cid:7019)     (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)
(cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6989)    
(4) (cid:6981)  , (cid:7408) (cid:7011)       (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7020)   , (cid:7408)
 , (cid:6981)      (cid:7416)(cid:7020)     (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409) (cid:7008)     
 (cid:6981)   (cid:7367)    
(5)  (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367)   (cid:7367)    , (cid:7409)   (cid:7008) , 
(cid:7408)     (cid:6979)       (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:6994)   (cid:6981)  
  (cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:6989)      (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)    

(6) (cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) 
   (cid:7408)  ,   (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)    
(7)  (cid:6994)     /   (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7277)   , (cid:6981)  
  (cid:7008) ,  (cid:7277) (cid:6979) ,  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6994)    (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6979) (cid:7286)   
(8) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  :
(i) (cid:6994)    (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:6994)  ; 
(ii) (cid:6994)  (cid:7409)    (cid:6979) (cid:7409)   (cid:7011)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 25
(9) (cid:6994)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019)      (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7409) 
  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7286) (cid:7286) (cid:6994)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    
(10) (cid:6994)   30 (cid:7408)      (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7277)     (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:6994)  
    (cid:7409) (cid:7272) ,   (cid:6994)   -   (cid:7009) (cid:7286)       (cid:6994)    (cid:7008)
 (cid:7016) (cid:7298)     (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7409) (cid:7009) (cid:7286)  30 (cid:7408)  (cid:6996)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6994)  
 (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)       (cid:7286)
29.   .—(1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7013)     , (cid:6981) : -
(i) (cid:7079)  :
() (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979) ;
() (cid:7407)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7263)   (cid:6981) : 7-11
(cid:6981), 12-16 (cid:6981)  16-18 (cid:6981)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)  (cid:7278)  (cid:6989) (cid:7409)
(ii)   :
() 10 (cid:6981)    (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  11  15  16-18 (cid:6981)   (cid:7300)  (cid:7298)     ;
() (cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7407) (cid:7021)     (cid:7278) 
(cid:6989) (cid:7409)
(iii) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  :
() (cid:7008)      16-18 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)  , (cid:7409)   ;
()     (cid:7008)   (cid:7286) (cid:7009)     16-18 (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)  ;
() 18 (cid:6981)    (cid:7286) (cid:7408)     18 (cid:6981)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  , (cid:7409)   ;
()      (cid:7286) (cid:7009)     18 (cid:6981)      (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  ;
()   (cid:7409)  18 (cid:7409)  (1)   ()   (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  
(iv)   :
() (cid:7408) 10 (cid:6981)          (cid:7286)    ,(cid:7289) 5-10 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7298) 
(cid:7408)(cid:7298)    (cid:7021)     (cid:7409)   ;
() 7-11 (cid:6981)  12-18 (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298)     ;
() (cid:7312)    (cid:7312)    (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    (cid:7298)    ;
(2)    (cid:7021)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)      (cid:7277) (cid:7408)(cid:7286)
(3) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7298) (cid:7298)       (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)  (cid:6996) 
(cid:7367)   (cid:7298)  
(4) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     (cid:7079) 

(5)    (cid:7298)       (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)
    (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)
(6) 50 (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)          (cid:7079)    (cid:7289):
(i) 2  () 25 (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  1000 (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981) 2000 (cid:6981) 
(ii) 2 (cid:6979) 25 (cid:7298)   300 (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) 600 (cid:6981) 
(iii)  (cid:6979)/(cid:7079)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  10 (cid:7298)   75 (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) 750 (cid:6981) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iv)  250 (cid:6981) 
(v)  (cid:6979) 800 (cid:6981) 
(vi)   250 (cid:6981) 
(vii)  (cid:6979) 330 (cid:6981) 
(viii) (cid:7021)  500 (cid:6981) 
(ix) 5 (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  25 (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) 125 (cid:6981) 
(x) 8  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  25 (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) 125 (cid:6981) 
(xi) (cid:6981) (cid:6979) () 300 (cid:6981)  () (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:6979) 200 (cid:6981) 
(xii) (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:6979) 120 (cid:6981) 
(xiii) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) 75 (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)   15 (cid:7298)   1125 (cid:6981) 
(xiv) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     () (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  250 (cid:6981)   2 (cid:6979) ()  75 (cid:6981)  () (cid:7021)   
 50 (cid:6981) 
(xv) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  300 (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) 600 (cid:6981) 
   2 (cid:6979)
(xvi)     (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)    (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)
 8495  (cid:6981)
(7) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:6989) (cid:6981) (cid:7011)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7277) ,  (cid:7021)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:7020)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6979) 
 (cid:7408)      (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) 
(8)  (cid:6981)(cid:7312)       (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)
(9)  (cid:7079), (cid:7416)(cid:7298)  (cid:7286)(cid:7407)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7079), , (cid:6979) , -  
(cid:7286)       (cid:6989)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) (cid:7298)
(10)      (cid:7021)  :
(i) (cid:7079)  (cid:7408),   (cid:7286) (cid:6991) ,  (cid:6979), (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6979), ,  (cid:6979)
 (cid:6981) (cid:6979)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286);
(ii) (cid:6989) (cid:7069) (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286);
(iii)    (cid:7378) (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7286); 
(iv)     (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    (cid:7378) (cid:7079) (cid:7019)  (cid:7286)
(11)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6979) (cid:7298)   (cid:7004)    (cid:7019)   (cid:7011)      
 (cid:6980)(cid:7298)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) 
(12) (cid:7008)    (cid:6981)(cid:7004)  (cid:7019) , (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)(cid:7011)   , (cid:7286) (cid:7013)    :
(i) (cid:7013) (cid:7009)  ;
(ii) ;
(iii) (cid:7410)(cid:7079), (cid:7021) --(cid:6989) ;
(iv)     ;
(v)  ;
(vi) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7278),   (cid:7409) (cid:7407), (cid:6981) (cid:7021) ,  (cid:7278)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979)  
(cid:7021) (cid:7069)(cid:6981);
(vii) (cid:7007)       (cid:7414)  
(viii) (cid:7079)(cid:6989) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 27
30. , (cid:7021) , (cid:7069)     (cid:7021)  .—(1)   (cid:7021)     (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
(cid:7409) (cid:7019) (cid:7312)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7008)    (cid:7079) (cid:7298) :-
. (cid:7021) 
(cid:7059).. (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7011)     (cid:7079)(cid:7074)
1. (cid:7374) (cid:7079)   1  (cid:7004)(cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:6981)  1
2.   (cid:7079)   2  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  2 (cid:6981)  2
3.  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)   2  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  6   1
4. (cid:7408) () (cid:7079)   1  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  1 (cid:6981)  1
5. (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)   1  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  1 (cid:6981)  1
6.  / (cid:7079)   2  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  2 (cid:6981)  1
7. (cid:7272)  (cid:7263)  (cid:7079)   1  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  1 (cid:6981)  1 ( (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  )
8. (cid:6994)  (cid:7079)   1  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  6   1
9.   (cid:7079)   2  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  3   1
. (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   
(cid:7059).. (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7074)
1. (cid:7021) (cid:6981)  (cid:7011)        (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7263) (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  
(cid:7011)       (cid:7079)(cid:6981) 5 
2.      (cid:7079)  3 
3.  (cid:7016)   (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079) (cid:6981) 12 (cid:6989) 
4.  (cid:7021) (cid:6981) (  ) (cid:7079) (cid:6981) 2 (cid:7021) 
5.  (cid:7021) (cid:6981) (  ) (cid:7079) (cid:6981) 2 (cid:7021) 
6.   (cid:7079) (cid:6981) 1
7. (cid:7074) (cid:7286)    (cid:7079) 6  (cid:7286) 2 
. (cid:7298)   
(cid:7059).. (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7074)
1.  (cid:7079)   2  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      1
2.  (cid:7079)   2   (cid:7298)   (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    
 1
3. (cid:7289) (cid:7079)   2   (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7286) 1
4.     (cid:7079)  3 
5.  (cid:7414) (  (cid:7409)) (cid:6981) (cid:7286) 2
6.  (cid:7414) (  (cid:7409)) (cid:6981) (cid:7286) 2
7.     (cid:6981) (cid:7286) 1
8. (cid:7074) (cid:7286)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    2 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
.  (cid:7021)  
1. (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)   1   (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    
2.    (cid:7079)   1   (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981)  1 
3. (cid:7021)  (cid:7278) (cid:7021)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    2 
4. (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7079) (cid:6981) 1
5. (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)   1   (cid:7004)(cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      1 
6. (cid:7272) (cid:7079)   2  (cid:7004)(cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  2    2
7. (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  :  (cid:7286) 3 
8.  (cid:7061) (cid:7019) 
(2) (cid:6989)  (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:6989) ,   (cid:7298)      (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7300) (cid:7286)  ,  
,   (cid:7289)  ,         (cid:7011)  (cid:7011)    (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7286),
           (cid:7021) (cid:6981)    (cid:7011) ,       
(cid:7011)  (cid:7011)   
(3) (cid:7021)   (cid:7373) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286),  (cid:7278) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7079) , (cid:7013)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7408) 
 :-
(cid:7059).. (cid:7074)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7414)   
1. (cid:7374) 3 (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  
2.  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  
3. (cid:7408) (cid:7079)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  
4. (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  
5.  (cid:7013)  (cid:7079) 2 (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  
6.    (cid:7286) ((cid:7298)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) 3 
(cid:7409))
7. (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7021) (cid:6981)  (cid:7011)     (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) 3 
8.   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  3 (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  
(4) (cid:7069) :    (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7013)     ,   (cid:7008)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7409)
 :
(cid:7059)..  (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7074)
1. (cid:7298)   (cid:7088)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)  100 
2. (cid:7079) /(cid:7289)  (cid:7079)  100 (cid:7061) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7408)
3.  (cid:7081) (cid:7079) 3  (cid:7286) 1
4.  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  100 (cid:7061) (cid:7409) ((cid:7351))
5.  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  3  (cid:7286) 
6. (cid:7013)    (cid:7286) 8 (10 (cid:7061)/(cid:7079) )
7. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6989) /(cid:7289) 3  (cid:7286) 2 (cid:7289)
8. (cid:7019) (cid:6981)  (cid:7016) (cid:7059)(cid:7409) ((cid:7416)(cid:7298) (cid:7286))  (cid:7286) 250 (cid:7061)
(5)   ,   (cid:7349) (cid:7408)    (cid:7013)     :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 29
(i)    :     3  (125 (cid:7061))  (cid:6979)    ;
(ii)   (cid:7298)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298)        
(cid:7021)       (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7277)    (cid:7408) (cid:7019)  ,  (cid:6979) (cid:7021)   (cid:7298)
(cid:7409)      (cid:6989)   (cid:7286)    (cid:6979) (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7286)   
(6)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7013)  (cid:7286) (cid:7011)     :
(cid:7059)..  (cid:7414)   
1.  (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7263) (cid:7079)  25  40
2. (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)  
3.   (cid:7409)   (cid:6979)
4. (cid:7408)  -   (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)  ( )  (cid:7408)  
(cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7074)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  (cid:6981)
5. (cid:6994)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7407)(cid:6999)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) 2
31. (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   -.—(1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7013)    (cid:7298), :
(i)  , ,  (cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7408)    (cid:7263)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7009)
(cid:7407) ,    ;
(ii)    , (cid:7407)    -   (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:7009)   (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021) ;
(iii)       (cid:7079);
(iv)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021) ;
(v) (cid:6994)   (cid:6981) (cid:7011)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)  (cid:6979);
(vi) (cid:7414) (cid:7409) (cid:7074);
(vii)  (cid:7298)          (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)
(cid:6990) ;
(viii)  (cid:7298)       (cid:7021)    (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)
(cid:6990) ;
(ix) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)       (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7021) ;
(x)  (cid:7409)    ,;
(xi)   (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)    (cid:6981)(cid:7298)      (cid:7021) ;
(xii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298)     (cid:7298)  ;
(xiii) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7286) -  ;
(xiv)    (cid:7300)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)   (cid:7298);
(xv) (cid:7079)(cid:7408) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)       ;
(xvi) (cid:7011) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)        (cid:6994) ;
(xvii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7021) , (cid:7300)   (cid:7409) ;
(xviii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7378) (cid:7021)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)       (cid:7409) ;
(xix) (cid:6981) (cid:7286)      (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7059)  ;
(xx) (cid:7414)  (cid:7059)    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7349)     (cid:6979)   (cid:6979) 
(cid:7083);
(xxi) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7286) -

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
32. (cid:7408)(cid:6981) : (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)(cid:6981)  ,  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)
(cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7414) (cid:7408) 
(2) (cid:7408)(cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  -    (cid:7410), (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  -, (cid:7407) (cid:7018) , , (cid:6979)
(cid:6979), (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979), (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    ,  (cid:6979),  (cid:7408)(cid:7059), (cid:7079)(cid:6981)    
(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298)  (cid:7020) (cid:7069) (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298), (cid:7004) (cid:7298), (cid:7008) (cid:7408)(cid:7298)    (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7298)
33.    
(cid:7021) , (cid:7013)     (cid:7298)   , (cid:6981) :
(i) (cid:7298)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:7286)    (cid:7408) 
(ii)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7019)      (cid:6980) 
(cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7018)    (cid:7409) 
(iii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   -(cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)     
(cid:7059)..  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408) (cid:7079)  
1. /(cid:7264)//(cid:6996)  600 (cid:7061), (16  18 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)  700 (cid:7061)) (cid:7286)   
  (cid:7264)    (cid:6996)    
2. // 120 (cid:7061)
3. (cid:7378)  25 (cid:7061)
4. (cid:7009)  25 (cid:7061)
5.  25 (cid:7061)
6. (cid:7016)  05 (cid:7061)
7.   (cid:6981) 05 (cid:7061)
8.  05 (cid:7061)
9.  05 (cid:7061)
10. /(cid:6981) 05 (cid:7061)
11.  ((cid:7019)  (cid:7286)) 150 (cid:7061)
12.   (cid:6981) 05 (cid:7061)
13. (cid:7275) (cid:7011)  100 (cid:7061)
(cid:7275)  130 (cid:7061)
14.    100 (cid:7061)/ 
15. (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)       115 (cid:7061)
(cid:7408)
16.      ( (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   60 (cid:7061) ( 100 (cid:7061)
 )
17.  40 (cid:7061)
18. /(cid:7409) 5 (cid:7061)
19. / 150
20.  150 (cid:7061)
50 (cid:7298)   (cid:7013)   (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)
21.  (cid:6981) 25 (cid:7061)
22.   25 (cid:7061)
23.    50 (cid:7061)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 31
24. (cid:7298)  50 (cid:7061)
25.  50 (cid:7061)
10 (cid:7408)   (cid:7408)  
26.   10 (cid:7061)
27.  150 (cid:7061)
28.  150 (cid:7061)
29.   500 (cid:7061)
 (cid:7298)  
30. (cid:7081) 500 (cid:7061)
31.  500 (cid:7061)
32.  300 (cid:7061)
(cid:7008)  (cid:7286)
33.  (cid:7412)    
(2) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298), (cid:7004) (cid:7298),   (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7020) (cid:7069) (cid:7004)       
(3) (cid:7312)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
(4)     (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) (cid:7272)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)  
(5) (cid:7408)   (cid:7018)  (cid:7409)     (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)    (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409) 
(6)  (cid:7286) (cid:7008)    (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7008) (cid:7312)     ,    (cid:7408)(cid:7021) (cid:7286)     (cid:7289):
(i)  (),  ( )   ( ) (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  (cid:7272)   ;
(ii) - (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7298)    80 (cid:7061)   (cid:7001)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) 60 (cid:7061)
  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)    100 (cid:7061)   ;
(iii)  ((cid:7061)),  ((cid:7021) (cid:7277)), (cid:7298) ((cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7275)), (cid:7298)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7408) 
(cid:7275) (cid:7011)   (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)      (cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:7408) (cid:7021)    (cid:7408) (cid:6981) (cid:7373)   (cid:7275)
(cid:7011)        (cid:6979)  (cid:7011) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7408)(cid:7021) (cid:7286)   (cid:7409)   
     (cid:7408)  (cid:7011)      (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7277) ;
(iv)   (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7074)(cid:7312) (cid:7286) -   (cid:7011)   ;
(v) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7367) (cid:7019)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)  
 (cid:6981)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7408) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)   (cid:7277) (cid:7289)    (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7016)    
(7)      :
(i) (cid:7019)  – 7.30  ( (cid:6981)(cid:7022))  8.30   (cid:7022)(cid:6981) 
() , (cid:7264)     (cid:7275)  (cid:7008)   ;
() (cid:7298)    (cid:7275)     (cid:7407) (cid:7409)    (cid:7408),   (cid:7011)     (cid:7272) (cid:7286)
  ;
()  ;
() (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7074) (cid:7286)   
(ii)    12.30   1.30  (cid:7022)  (cid:7074)   – 7.00 (cid:7022) – 8.00 (cid:7022)
()   (cid:7275)  (cid:7298)  ;
() (cid:7011)  ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
()   ;
()   
(8) (cid:7008) 
(i)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7263), (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7378)     (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    ;
(ii) (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    , (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     
     (cid:7408)  , (cid:7409)   (cid:7007)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7263),        (cid:7408)(cid:7004) 
  (cid:7408)   ;
(iii)  , ,   (cid:7298)    (cid:7407)(cid:6989)       (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) 
  (cid:7408)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021)(cid:7005)  (cid:7298)       (cid:7409) (cid:7407) 
(cid:7079)(cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)(cid:7407)     
(iv) (cid:7020) (cid:7069) (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298)    -     (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)
     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)       (cid:7074)   (cid:7011)   , 
(cid:6981):
() (cid:7074) (cid:7408) (26 );
() (cid:7021) (cid:7074) (cid:7408) (15 (cid:7021) );
() (cid:7004)   (cid:7008) (cid:7408) (2 (cid:6989) );
()  (cid:7408) (14 (cid:7013) )
() (cid:7020) (cid:7069) (cid:7004) ;
() (cid:7021)  (cid:7004) ;
()    (cid:7021)   (cid:7414) (cid:7408)  (cid:7289)
34. (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   .—(1)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286),  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    
    (cid:7019)     (cid:7011)   
(2)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  -(cid:7004)  24  (cid:7011)   
(3) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  :
(i) (cid:7079)  24 (cid:7298)     (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    , , (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7367)
(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  
(ii)   (cid:6981) 24  (cid:7298)      (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7367) (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 

(iii)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)      (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7019)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  
(cid:7079) (cid:7286)
(iv)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)     ,     (cid:7008)
(cid:7407)   (cid:7021) (cid:7312)    ;
(v)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) , (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7021)(cid:7059) (cid:7409)(cid:7410)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7074)
(cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)  ;
(vi) (cid:7079)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408)
;
(vii) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)    (cid:7019)  (cid:7079) ;
(viii) (cid:7414)  (cid:7059) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)   ;
(ix)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)   ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 33
(x)   -  (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)    (cid:7016)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7277)    - 
  (cid:7407)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)     (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7016) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)
    (cid:7019)  ,  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   (cid:6979) (cid:7263)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)
 (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7277) ;
(xi) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      (cid:6981) (cid:7079)    (cid:7079)     ,   (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  
 (cid:7407) (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7074)(cid:7298)      ,(cid:7289) (cid:7020)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:7019)  ;
(xii)   , (cid:7008) (cid:7286)   (cid:7300)     (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7409) (cid:7272) ,  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)
(cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7367)     (cid:6989)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) ,   (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) , (cid:7410)  (cid:7008)
(cid:7287) (cid:7298)   ;
(4) (cid:6981) (cid:6989)   (),  (cid:7272), , ,        (cid:7286)  (cid:7278)   
(cid:7300) (cid:7409)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)    (cid:7298) 
  (cid:7408) 
(5) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)     (cid:7408) (cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:7021)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)
(cid:7409)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) , (cid:7408) (cid:7019)  (cid:7263)  (cid:6981)(cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   , 1971 (cid:7286)
(cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)    (cid:7007)  
(6)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7007)   (cid:6996)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312), (cid:7079)(cid:6979)-
 (cid:7407)(cid:7298), (cid:7407)   (cid:6979)(cid:7312)   (cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    
   (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7019)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7409)/ (cid:6980)     
(cid:7011)   
(7) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)       (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7408) (cid:7019) 
(cid:7263)   (cid:7019)     , (cid:6980)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(8) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) - (cid:7272)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7378)
(cid:7408)   (cid:7019)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979)(cid:7298)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7312)    
35.  (cid:7021) (cid:7021)(cid:7005)  : (1) (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:6989)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)   
(cid:7286)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7286)
(2) (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:7286)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298)   
(cid:7286)
(3) (cid:7298) (cid:7079)  (cid:7407) (cid:7407) :(cid:6979),  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981) (cid:7407)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7011)     ,(cid:7289) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
   (cid:7272)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7011)   
(cid:7021) (cid:7020)  :    (cid:7079)   (cid:7407) (cid:7407)  :(cid:6979) :   (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) 
 (cid:7407)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)      (cid:7019)  (cid:7408)     (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) (cid:6991) (cid:7312)  
           (cid:7410)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)        (cid:7079),  (cid:7019)  
 (cid:7289)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7298)       (cid:7021)    (cid:7289)   :(cid:6979)    (cid:7004) (cid:6981)
(cid:7004)  (cid:7079)  
(4) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7004)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021)(cid:7005)   :(cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 

(5) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)        (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7312) (cid:7409)   (cid:7011) 
 ,  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), (cid:6980)  : (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7405) (cid:7298)      
- (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7289)
(6) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7312)      (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      
 (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:7408) 
(7) (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:6980) (cid:7016)     (cid:7408)  
(cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)    (cid:7277)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(8)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7367) (cid:7298)       (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)
36. (cid:6979) : (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7005) (cid:6981)  , (cid:7019) , (cid:7021)      (cid:6979)
(cid:7079) 
(2) (cid:6979) , (cid:7286) (cid:7378), (cid:7081) (cid:7378), (cid:6989)  (cid:7378), (cid:7407) (cid:6979)   (cid:7019)  , 
(cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:6979)  , (cid:7011)   
(3)  (cid:7277) (cid:7019)  , (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7378)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:7021)  
(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409) 
(4)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)    (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7272)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7414)  
  (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7016)  (cid:7408)  
   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7018) (cid:7298) (cid:7367)     
(5) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7409) 
(6) (cid:7298)  (cid:7074)(cid:7004) ,   (cid:7021) (cid:7409)(cid:7286)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  
37. (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) : (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7021)      (cid:7409) , (cid:7079),
(cid:7272),  (cid:6991)     (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079) 
(2) (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7018)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) ,   (cid:7272) (cid:7407) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  ,  (cid:7374)(cid:7019) (cid:7353)(cid:7059)
   (cid:6989)  (cid:7009) (cid:7286)   (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7353)(cid:7059)
    (cid:7079)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)
(3)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7407)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:7298),  
(cid:7298) ,   (cid:7286) ,  (cid:6979)   (cid:7312)    (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)   (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7408) 
(4) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)     (cid:7298)      (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7367) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)  
 (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981),    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
38.    : (1)  (cid:7312) (cid:7286)     ,   (cid:7007)  , , ,
    , (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059),   (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7408) 
(2)  -(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7011)   
(3)      (cid:7286) (cid:6979)   (cid:6980) , (cid:7061), , (cid:7021)  , (cid:7008)   (cid:7408)
 (cid:7408) 
(4) (cid:7004) (cid:7298)   (cid:7020) (cid:7069) (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  
(cid:7079)  (cid:7409) 
(5) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)      (cid:6979)(cid:7074) , (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7286), , (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7074),  (cid:7021) (cid:7286), (cid:7021) 
(cid:7021) (cid:7286), (cid:7081)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7286),     (cid:7408) (cid:7298)
(6) (cid:7298)    (cid:7367)    (cid:7409)        (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7011)   
(7) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7021) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:7286) (cid:7373)     (cid:6981) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) , (cid:7004)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004) 
 (cid:7013)  (cid:7408)   
(8) (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7408) (cid:7019)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  -  (cid:7409)      
(cid:7021) , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)       (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
39. (cid:7079)   : (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)     
 (cid:7079)  
(2) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7312)        (cid:7019)     (cid:7286), (cid:7298) , (cid:7409) , 
(cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079), (cid:7407)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)     
 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 35
(3) (cid:7079)  (cid:7286) (cid:7013)   (cid:7298) :-
(i)   (cid:6979)  (  (cid:6979) ) – (cid:7007)(cid:6979);
(ii)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  – (cid:7021)  ;
(iii) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) – (cid:7021) ;
(iv) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   – (cid:7021) ;
(v) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981) – (cid:7021) ;
(vi) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7018)    – (cid:7021) ;
(vii) (cid:7007)  – (cid:7021) ;
(viii) (cid:6981)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7021)  – (cid:7021) ;
(ix) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7079) – (cid:7021) ;
(x) (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7074) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) 
(4) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409), (cid:7013)   -(cid:6981)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)        :
(i) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  , , (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:6979) :(cid:6979);
(ii) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7312)  ;
(iii) , , (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   - (cid:7409) (cid:7021) ;
(iv)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  :(cid:6979);
(v) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) - (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7021)  ;
(vi) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7312) (cid:7409)  (cid:6979);
(vii)   (cid:7312)  (cid:7079);
(viii)    (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  ;
(ix) (cid:6979)     (cid:6981)(cid:7059);
(x)  , ,  (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7298), (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:6981)  ;
(xi)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079),   ;
(xii) (cid:7019)    (cid:7312)     (cid:7300) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286), (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7021) (cid:6981)  (cid:7019)  (cid:6981)
(cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7409)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981);
(xiii) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:6981) (cid:6981) ;
(xiv) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)   (cid:7021) (cid:6981);
(xv) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7021) (cid:6981)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981);
(xvi) (cid:7011)    (cid:7312)     (cid:7008)  ;
(xvii)   (cid:7408)(cid:6981);
(xviii) (cid:6979), (cid:7018)  (cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7298),   (cid:7272)      (cid:7286) 
  (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:7079);
(xix)    (cid:7298)    (cid:7021) (cid:6979)(cid:7407)  (cid:6989)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)
 ,   (cid:6979) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7004)  ;
(xx) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7298)   ; 
(xxi) (cid:7008)      (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(5) (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7074) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)    (cid:6981) -   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)
  (cid:7263)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7298)    (cid:7298)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298)   
(cid:7407)  
(6) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)     (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7079)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7079) (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7009)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) 
(7) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)    ,    (cid:7007)    (cid:6979) ,  (cid:7079)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979)   -(cid:6981) 
 (cid:7019)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)     
(8)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7298)   (cid:7021) , (cid:7021) , (cid:7079)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979), (cid:6981)    (cid:7021)
    (cid:7021)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7298)
(9) (cid:7021)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7272)(cid:7373)       (cid:7286),     (cid:7021)  (cid:7277) 
 (cid:7079)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7021) ,  (cid:7021)    (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:7408) 
(10)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7007)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)       (cid:7286)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7272) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)
 (cid:7409)   (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) -(cid:6981)  (cid:7414)    
(11) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)      (cid:6981) 
(cid:7278) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7298)  (cid:7013) (cid:7079) (cid:7409) 
(12) (cid:6981)    (cid:7286)      (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7414) 
(13)  (cid:7407)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979)   (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367)   
40.   : (1) (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7298)  6  10, 11  15 (cid:6981)  16  18 (cid:6981)  (cid:7008) 
 (cid:7300)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)          (cid:7298)   (cid:7407) (cid:7409) 
(2)     (cid:7013)  (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)     (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)  :
(i) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)   ;
(ii)  (cid:7409)      (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  ;
(iii)   (cid:7408)(cid:6981)     ;
(iv) (cid:6979), (cid:7018)    (cid:7312)   ;
(v) (cid:7079)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7013)    (cid:7021)   ;
(vi) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:6981)(cid:7312) (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ;
(vii)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7286)(cid:7407),      (cid:7007)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7004) 
(cid:7018) (cid:6989) ;
(viii) (cid:7079)   (cid:7007)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)
(3)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7298) 
     (cid:7021)        (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)   (cid:6979)  
(4)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7061), (cid:7286)  (cid:7061), (cid:7021)  
 (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  , (cid:7011)    (cid:7289)
(5)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7018) (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7079) (cid:6980)(cid:7298)
 (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7298)     
(6) (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:6994)     (cid:7079) (cid:6980) (cid:7013)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) :
(i) (cid:7298)       (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7409) (cid:6989)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7312) 
;
(ii) (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)   ;
(iii)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)        ;
(iv) (cid:7298)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021)    ; 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 37
(v)  (cid:7008)   (cid:6981)
(7) (cid:7079)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ,   (cid:7298) (cid:7286) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7300) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:7019)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7008) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    (cid:6979) ,  (cid:7277) (cid:7019)  
41. (cid:6979) : (1) (cid:6996)  , (cid:6996)    (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)    
(2) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6996)     (cid:7021)  (cid:6981): (cid:6981)  , (cid:6996)    (cid:6979) ,
(cid:6996)   , (cid:6996)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  , (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6980), (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   (cid:7079)(cid:7020) 
 (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7013)  (cid:7298) , (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7286) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979) 
(3) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 46 (cid:7286) (cid:6996)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)  21 (cid:7409) (2)   (cid:7407)
     (cid:7312)  (cid:6979) 
(4) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)       (cid:7408) (cid:7021)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)  (cid:7410)   , (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)
  (cid:7298)  (cid:6994)  (cid:6979) 
(5) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)    (cid:6981)(cid:7008)        (cid:7407)(cid:6981) 
(6) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979) ,   (cid:7298)      (cid:7298)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)     
     (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)   (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)     (cid:6979)   
(7) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7019)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)       
(8)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)    :
(i) (cid:6981)    (cid:7021) ;
(ii) (cid:7021)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) ;
(iii) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  ;
(iv)  (cid:7298),  , (cid:6979)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)     (cid:7021) ;
(v)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6980)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)    
(9)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 46 (cid:7286)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6979) 
(10)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7312)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)          (cid:7408) 
(11)  (cid:6979) ,   (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)    (cid:7020) (cid:7300)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     
(cid:7298)      (cid:7298)      (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286)        
(12)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7019)    (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     
 
42. (cid:7016)    : (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7020)   (cid:7021) (cid:7312), (cid:7019) (cid:7378)(cid:7298)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) , (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7312),  (cid:7272)  
(cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7407) (cid:7263)-(cid:7004)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7007)    (cid:6981) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286)(cid:7076) 
 (cid:6996)   (cid:7367)     (cid:6981), ,  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298), (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021) (cid:7312), 
(cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7312)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7408) 
(2) (cid:6989)  - (1)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7020) (cid:6981) (cid:7008)  (cid:7312)           (cid:7286)
(cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) 
(cid:7007) -7
(cid:7275)(cid:7061)
43. (cid:7275)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  : (1)   , (cid:7275) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7011)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)  (cid:6981) 
 (cid:7298)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7272)  (cid:6989)   (cid:7298)       (cid:6979) (cid:7298)
(cid:7409)    (cid:6996)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7298)     (cid:7011)  
44.   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7272)  (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  ,(cid:7289)     
(cid:7074) (cid:7298) : (1) (cid:7298)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7299)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   -    (cid:7408)  :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(i) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7272)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7298) (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)    0-6 (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)  
(cid:7298) (cid:7008) (cid:7286) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7272)  (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)  ,         
    (cid:7277) (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7007)  
 (cid:7021)  (cid:7407) (cid:7011)   
(ii) (cid:7408) 6  8 (cid:7300) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)   (cid:7300) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)        (cid:7275)
(cid:7061)    (cid:7407) (cid:7277)      (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7272)
 (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)  ,    (cid:6979)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)
   (cid:7367) (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)        ,    , (cid:7286) 
   (cid:7074) (cid:7298)
(iii)   (cid:6979)    (cid:7004) (cid:7061)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7367) 8  18 (cid:7300) (cid:7409)
 (cid:6981)   ,   (cid:7272)  (cid:7004) (cid:7061)   (cid:6989)  (cid:7289),  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) 
(cid:7004) (cid:7061) - (cid:7367)   (cid:7408)  , (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)        
(cid:7286)    (cid:7074) (cid:7298)
(iv)      (cid:7263)  (cid:7019) (cid:7312)     (cid:6981)        (cid:7286) (cid:7275)
(cid:7061)    (cid:7407) (cid:7277)     (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7272) 
(cid:6989)  (cid:7408)  ,(cid:7289)    (cid:6979)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  
 (cid:7367) (cid:7407)   (cid:6979)    (cid:7004) (cid:7061)  (cid:7409)   
(cid:7367) (cid:7407)         (cid:7286)    (cid:7074) (cid:7298), (cid:7287) (cid:7407)    (cid:7409)
 (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6989)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7298)
(v)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:6981)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7008)   (cid:7300)  (cid:7408) (cid:7407)    (cid:7286) 
,      (cid:7407) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)           (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  
 (cid:7272)  (cid:6989)        (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7021) (cid:7069)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    

45. (cid:7008)    (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7286) (cid:7011)
 
(2) (cid:7008)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)      (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) , 1908 (1908  5)  (cid:7023) ,
1872 (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7277)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015  (cid:7275)
(cid:7061)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   (cid:7408) 
46.  (cid:7298)   (cid:7409)  : (1) (cid:7008)   (cid:7409)  61 (cid:7409) - (2) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7275),    (cid:7409)
    (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)             (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7008) : (cid:6979)(cid:7074)
   (cid:7008)   (cid:7008)        (cid:7011)   ,      (cid:7008) (cid:6996) (cid:7020) 
(cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  - (cid:7286)  
(2)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7275)  (cid:7263) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7008)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7286) 
   (cid:7408) (cid:6981)   (cid:7277) (cid:7409) 
47. (cid:7275)   (cid:6979)    : (cid:7275)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7408)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)    
  
48.  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7312)   (cid:6981) : (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)
    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)  66  (cid:7298) (cid:7079)(cid:7298)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)

49. (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6989) (cid:7004) : (1) (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)  68 (cid:7409)  (1) (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7004)  
(cid:7013)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298)    (cid:7020) (cid:7408) ; (cid:6981):
(i) (cid:7079) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7079)      
   (cid:7007)   (cid:7408)        (cid:7407)   (cid:7286) 
     (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7409)  59 (cid:7409)  (5)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 39
(ii)   (cid:7409)  59 (cid:7409)  (12)   (cid:7286) (cid:7408)     (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)
 (cid:7286)       (cid:7407)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7286) (cid:7272)  ,  
(cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) ;
(iii)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7275) (cid:7079)(cid:7074)  ;
(iv)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7286) (cid:6979)    1993 (cid:7286)    (cid:6994)  23  
  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7286) (cid:7020)  (cid:7079)(cid:7074)  ;
(v)   (cid:7079) (cid:7079)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)    ;
(vi) (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7414)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)  
;
(vii) (cid:6996)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7298),  (cid:6979) (cid:7298),  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)  (cid:7275)
(cid:7061)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)(cid:7298), (cid:6981)(cid:7312), (cid:6980) (cid:7298), (cid:7300), (cid:7013) (cid:7298),
(cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:7007)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) ;
(viii) (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7286)
  ;
(ix) (cid:7013)        (cid:7021)   :
() , (cid:7407)(cid:7004) (cid:6989)     (cid:7298)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059);
()  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7275)  ;
()  (cid:7079)(cid:7312)  (cid:7079)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979);
() (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   (cid:7409);
() (cid:7275) (cid:7061)       (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7373)
(x) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7298)  , (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) 
(xi) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7298)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061)
-    (cid:7018)  (cid:7286)(cid:7408)(cid:7076)     ;
(xii)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061) -
   (cid:7018)  (cid:7286)(cid:7408)(cid:7076)    - ;
(xiii) (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7373) (cid:7298)  (cid:7007)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061)       (cid:6981), (cid:7272) 
, (cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7020)  ;
(xiv)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)     (cid:7277) (cid:7019)  ,   (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7079)(cid:7298)   (cid:7367)(cid:6979) 
; 
(xv)  (cid:7298)      (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7298)    (cid:7275) (cid:7061)  
   (cid:7275) (cid:7061) -  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)      (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298) 
(cid:7079) 
50. (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6989) (cid:7409)     (cid:7288): (1) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7286)
  (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7013)  (cid:7074) (cid:7298) :
(i)  (cid:7407) ;
(ii) (cid:7409)  25 (cid:6981)    60 (cid:6981)        (cid:7409)  69 (cid:7409)  (1)  
(.)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7021)   , (cid:7008)   21 (cid:6981) ;
(iii) (cid:7079)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7373)   (cid:7416)(cid:7020)   ; 
(iv) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)  ,  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)    (cid:7021) (cid:7004)   (cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  
    (cid:6994)   (cid:7408)  
(2)   (cid:7409)  69 (cid:7409)  (1)   () (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7059)(cid:7059)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(3)    (cid:7021) (cid:7298)    (cid:7079)(cid:6981)    (cid:6996)  -  -(cid:6996)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7299)(cid:7275) (cid:7407)
(cid:7367)      (cid:7298) (cid:7408)(cid:7008) (cid:7277)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7013)   (cid:7408)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7378) (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)    
(cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:7408) 
(4) (cid:6996)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7013)        (cid:6996)    (cid:7408)  :
(i) (cid:6996)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   (cid:7367)   (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ;
(ii)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7275) (cid:7061)   
(cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:7298)    (cid:7286) ;
(iii)   (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6996)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061) 
(cid:7298) (cid:7367)    (cid:7004) (cid:7020)   (cid:7021) ;
(iv) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:6996) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:6981)   (cid:6996)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)
(cid:7272) (cid:6981);
(v) (cid:6996)  (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7008)   (cid:7021) 
(5)  (cid:6996) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:6996)       (cid:7367)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7408)
    (cid:7289) -  (cid:6989)   , (cid:6996)      (cid:7277)  
(6)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7275) (cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7011)  (cid:7013) 
    (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7011)      (cid:7408) 
(i) (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ;
(ii) (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7020)    (cid:7004) (cid:7020) ;
(iii) (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:6981);
(iv)    (cid:7021) ;
(v)   ; 
(vi)   (cid:7272)(cid:7373)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7373)  
(7)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)      (cid:7079) (cid:6981)
(cid:7008)      (cid:7079), (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7408) 
(8) (cid:7407)  (cid:7286) (cid:6989)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7088)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7020) (cid:7069)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  
(cid:7298)  ,  (cid:7298)  (cid:6989)    (cid:7408) 
(9)  (cid:7409)  69 (cid:7409)  (1)  (.)  ()      (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7367)  
(cid:7287)  (cid:7408) , (cid:7286) (cid:7013)     :
(i) ,     (cid:7074) (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286);
(ii)     (cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)    (cid:6989)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286);
(iii)     (cid:7409) (cid:7074) (cid:7367)   (cid:6979)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:6980) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286);

(iv) (cid:7021)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286),    (cid:7021)  
(10)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)     (cid:7021)      (cid:7074)    (cid:6989)  (cid:7408) 
(11)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7008) ,    (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981), (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7004) (cid:7074)  (cid:7408)       
 60 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    ,   (cid:7409) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)   2 (cid:6981)  
(12)  - (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)    (cid:7074) (cid:7277) 
(13) (cid:7408) (cid:7407)(cid:6989)    (cid:7286), (cid:6996)     (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:7416)(cid:7020)    
(14) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    - (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)      (cid:7408) :
(i)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7004) (cid:7074)   ; 
(ii)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7408) ,    (cid:7021)       ; 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 41
(iii)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7298)     :
() (cid:7408)  (cid:7272) (cid:7278)  ; 
()  (cid:7407)(cid:7074)    (cid:7286)   ; 
()    (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)      (cid:7409)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) 
 ; 
() (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7272), (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:6981)  (cid:7374)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7263)     
(cid:7298)       ; 
()   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7409)
(cid:7298) (cid:7286) -(cid:7300)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) 
  (cid:7286) (cid:7009)    , 
() (cid:7408) (cid:7090)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7374)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981) ,   (cid:7021) 
 (cid:7263)   
(15) (cid:6996)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)     - (cid:7021)    (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  
(cid:7298)   (cid:7079)  1000 (cid:7271)  (cid:7016) ,  (cid:6989)      (cid:7408)  (cid:7074) (cid:7275),   
  (cid:7263) (cid:7018)     (cid:7074) 
51. (cid:7079) (cid:7409)      (cid:6981)   : (1) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7409) 
(2)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7004) (cid:7019)    (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:7074) (cid:7367)   (cid:7408)      (cid:6981)  
(cid:7018)    (cid:7079)   (cid:7407)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7018)  (cid:7263) 
(3)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7367)  
(4)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7409) (cid:7021)        (cid:7408) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) 
(5)   (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)      
(6)    (cid:7286)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7298)
(7)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7367) (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286), (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7367)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7416)(cid:7020)   
(cid:7408) 
(8)   (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7074) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298),   (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7263)   
(9) (cid:7298)    , (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)   
(10)   (cid:6981)(cid:7275) (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7367)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
(11)        (cid:7013)     (cid:7008)     (cid:7019)  ,   (cid:7367)
 (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7367)  
52. (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7414) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) : (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)  (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7004)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)      (cid:7263) 30     (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)
 71 (cid:7409)  (1)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7414) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   
(2) - (1)    (cid:7414) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7367)     (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7367)
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)(cid:7407)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
53.    -   (cid:6979) : (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7004)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7312)  (cid:7414)  (cid:6990) (cid:6981)
  (cid:7079)     (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7079) (cid:7408)  , (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)

(2) (cid:7079) (cid:7004)  (cid:6981)      (cid:7263) (cid:7018)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7390) (cid:7409)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  

(3) (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7312)  , (cid:7004)    (cid:7298)    (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  
 (cid:7019)    (cid:7408) (cid:7079)  (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7074)    (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:6979)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)    (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:6979) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7298),  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  
  (cid:6981)     
(4) (cid:7079)  (cid:7312)  -    (cid:7074) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) 
(cid:7408) 
(5) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7414)   (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7367) (cid:7021) (cid:6979)(cid:7407)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
(6) (cid:7079)  (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7414)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981)   (cid:7312)  (cid:7414)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981)    ,
30     (cid:6981) (cid:7074) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ,  (cid:7079)  (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) 
 (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(7) (cid:7079), (cid:6979), (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7408)     (cid:7367) (cid:7409) 
(cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)   (cid:7074) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(cid:7007) -8
(cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) 
54. (cid:7298)  (cid:7272)(cid:7373) (cid:7298)    (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1) (cid:7408)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373)  (cid:7409)  , (cid:7407), (cid:6979), 
 (cid:7074)  (cid:7007) , (cid:7016)    (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021)     (cid:7367) (cid:7409)   
(2) (cid:7408)   (cid:7272)(cid:7373) (cid:6980)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  ,   (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ((cid:7079)..(cid:7407).) (cid:6981) 
(3) (cid:7408)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373) -(cid:6980)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  ,      (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7020)     
(cid:7021) (cid:7069)      (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) , 1973 (cid:7409)  155 (cid:7409) - (2)     (cid:6981) 
(4)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7298)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286), (cid:7016)    (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) 
(5)       (cid:7079)(cid:7373)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061) ,   (cid:6981), , (cid:7408)
  (cid:7021)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  ,     (cid:7021)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)
   (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)      (cid:7021)    (cid:7409) (cid:7008) 
   (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)    (cid:6981)(cid:6989)     
(6)     (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)..(cid:7407).  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   (cid:7408) 
  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)          (cid:7298)
 (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6979) (cid:7272)     
(7)  (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:7298)      (cid:6994)  (cid:7408)       ,   (cid:6989)
 (cid:6991)   
(8) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286) (cid:7408)       (cid:7286)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408) 
(9)    (cid:7407)     (cid:7079)   - (cid:7021)    
(10) , ,  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  , (cid:6981), (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004) 
(cid:7019)   (cid:7016)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7011)   
(11)      (cid:7007)  ,     (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)   -(cid:7021)  (cid:7059) (cid:7286),
(cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7298),    
(12) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)       (cid:6979)(cid:7004)     (cid:7298)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
(cid:7008)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:6979);  (cid:7079),   ;  (cid:7277)   (cid:7298)      (cid:7080)(cid:7286)(cid:7410);
(cid:7021) (cid:7298), (cid:7298) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7023)     
(cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7408) 
(13) (cid:7013)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7263)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) /(cid:6979)     (cid:6979)(cid:7004)    :
(i) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)  ,   (cid:7021)           (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
 (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  1973 (cid:7409)  164       
(ii)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)    (cid:6979):  (cid:7408) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 43
(iii)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) , 1973 (cid:7409)  164 (cid:7409) - (1)  (cid:7298)  , - (cid:7298)
(cid:7367)    (cid:7408)   
(iv) -  (cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:7298)
(14)   (cid:7079)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981)             (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   -
(cid:7021)  (cid:7011)                      (cid:7061) (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008) 
 (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7407) ,     (cid:7008)      (cid:7018)  (cid:7263)    
  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   - (cid:7021)     (cid:7079) (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)    
(cid:7080)(cid:7286)(cid:7410)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   
(15) (cid:7408)   (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)      (cid:7277) ,     (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  
(cid:7023)   (cid:7080)(cid:7286)(cid:7410)  (cid:7007)     (cid:7408)   
(16)   (cid:7080)(cid:7286)(cid:7410)  (cid:7277) ,  (cid:7019)  ,    (cid:7074) (cid:7018)          (cid:6979)
 (cid:6996)     (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7079) (cid:7367) (cid:6981)   (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
(17) (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:7023)      (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)    
 (cid:7408) 
(18)    ,      ,   (cid:7019)     (cid:7013)   (cid:7298)
  (cid:7408) 
(i) -  (cid:6979) ((cid:7298))   ((cid:6989) (cid:7298)(cid:7408)   (cid:7299)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286) )    (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) (cid:6989)
(cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    ,   (cid:7409)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6980)
(cid:6989)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7008)    
      
(ii)  (cid:7277) (cid:7019)     (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)  (cid:7011)   
(iii)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  -  (cid:6979)  (cid:7286) (cid:7009)  (cid:7289)     (cid:7408) (cid:7021)    
          ,   (cid:7008)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7021) 
 (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7008)     (cid:6979)          (cid:7021)   
   (cid:7287)          (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  
(iv)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)  ,   ,   (cid:7409) 
94   (cid:6981)        (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)   (cid:7408) 
(v)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7312)    (cid:7407)    (cid:7408) (cid:7019)      (cid:6979)
   (cid:7011)   
(vi)       (cid:6981), (cid:7008)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7021) (cid:6994)     (cid:7286) (cid:6981) 
(vii) (cid:7074),  (cid:7409)      (cid:7286) (cid:7023)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) 
(viii)   (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)         (cid:7407)   (cid:7079) 
(cid:7277)  
(ix) (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7019) , (cid:6979)(cid:7004)      (cid:7021) (cid:7272)      (cid:7007)  (cid:7414) 
  (cid:6989)  
(x)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7074) (cid:6979)    (cid:7286),   (cid:7016)     (cid:7023)  (cid:7061) (cid:7286)
-   ,  (cid:7408)  
(xi) (cid:7008)   (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)        (cid:7013)   
(xii)   (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7021)      (cid:7004)  (cid:6979)(cid:7312)   (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7367)
(cid:7019)  (cid:7408) 
(19)  ,  (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  :
(i) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409), 
(ii) (cid:7011)  (cid:7079)(cid:6989) , 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iii)   (cid:7079) (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) (cid:7367)
(20) (cid:7008)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7414)(cid:7298)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7409) 
(21)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   :
(i)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)    
(ii)   (cid:6979)    (cid:7016) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)    
55.  (cid:7409)  75       (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1)   (cid:7409)  75     (cid:7079)(cid:6981),
(cid:7408)        (cid:7059)    (cid:7408)      (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) ,
      (cid:7079)    (cid:7079) , 2006 (2007  6)    
  (cid:6989)  (cid:7287) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:7298)     (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(2)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7059)  (cid:6981) (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)      (cid:7408)  
 (cid:6979)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)         (cid:7299)(cid:7275)    (cid:7263)    -  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  
(cid:6981)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)    (cid:7016)  (cid:6981) (cid:7011)  
(3)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979)           (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408) 
(cid:7287)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:6989)      :(cid:7016)  (cid:6979) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)      (cid:7011)  
  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7011)   (cid:7286) (cid:7263)     , (cid:7004) (cid:6981) (cid:6979)    (cid:7409)  
(cid:7004)  (cid:7263)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)      (cid:7021)     (cid:6981)    (cid:7287) 
 (cid:7409)  75   (cid:7059)  (cid:7016)  
(56)  (cid:7409)  77    (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1)    (cid:7008)      (cid:7021) 
 (cid:7300)  :(cid:7079) (cid:7300)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286), (cid:7059)(cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) ,   ,
    (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7408) (cid:7079)   (cid:7008)      (cid:7021)   (cid:7300) 
:(cid:7079) (cid:7300)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286)       (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6981) 
(2)    (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)  :(cid:7079) (cid:6981)        (cid:7079) (cid:7286)   
,    (cid:6981)  , (cid:7021),  (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)     (cid:6981)     
 (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)  
(3) (cid:7408)  (cid:7008)      (cid:7013)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)   ,     (cid:7013)   (cid:7408)
   (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7079)  , (cid:6980) (cid:6989)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)   (cid:6981) 
 (cid:7287) (cid:7407) 
(4) (cid:7408)  (cid:7008)      (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)  :(cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7408) 
  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7263)   ,     (cid:6981)    (cid:7013)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7298)  
 (cid:6981)    (cid:7013)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)  (cid:6979) 
(5) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)     (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6981)      (cid:7287)  
(6) (cid:6981)    (cid:7407)(cid:7021) , (cid:7286)  (cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7020)  (cid:7263)    (cid:7263)   (cid:7286)  
(cid:6989)  (cid:7287)        (cid:7407)(cid:7298)     (cid:7021)     (cid:6981) (cid:7409) 

(7) (cid:7021) , (cid:6981)     (cid:7408)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) ,    ,    (cid:7287)
 
(8) (cid:7008)    , (cid:7013)  (cid:7004)     (cid:7298)      (cid:7079) (cid:7021)     (cid:7079)(cid:7414) 
 (cid:7408) (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)      (cid:7013)  (cid:7004)           (cid:7286) 7 (cid:6981)  
(cid:6979)     (cid:7271)   (cid:6981)  ,    
(9)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7004)   (cid:7008)      (cid:7019)    (cid:7079)(cid:7414)   (cid:7408) (cid:7408)   (cid:7008) 
   (cid:7013)  (cid:7004)            (cid:7286) 7 (cid:6981)      (cid:6981)  
 (cid:7271)    ,   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 45
(10)     (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)    (cid:7408)   (cid:6981) 
(cid:6981)  200    (cid:7008)    , (cid:7021)    (cid:6981)  :(cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298) 
      (cid:7409)  77     
57.  (cid:7409)  78       (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1)    (cid:7008)    , (cid:7021)  
  :(cid:7079) (cid:6981) ,  , (cid:7414)   (cid:7021)          (cid:7409)   (cid:7408) 
   (cid:7408)  (cid:7008)    , (cid:7021)   (cid:7312)  :(cid:7079) (cid:7300) (cid:7409)     (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6981)

(2)     (cid:7409)  78       ,  (cid:6981)  (cid:7013)   (cid:7408) , (cid:7408) 
   (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)    (cid:6981),    
58.  (cid:7409)  80        (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1)   , (cid:7407)(cid:7004) (cid:6989)      
 (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7275) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981)   (cid:7408)     
  (cid:7021) -(cid:7079)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6981) 
(2)    (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7408)    ,     (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7298)
 (cid:7408)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7286)     (cid:6981)    (cid:7287) (cid:7407) 
(3)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7373) (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367) 
(cid:7409)  80     (cid:7408)  ,   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)     (cid:7021)    (cid:7275)(cid:7061) 
(cid:7286)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7286)       (cid:7407)   
59.  (cid:7409)  81       (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1) (cid:7408)        (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)
 ,   (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6981) 
(2) (cid:7079) (cid:7367)  (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7298)     (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7275)(cid:7061)    (cid:7408) 
(cid:7275)(cid:7061) - ((cid:7312))    -   (cid:6979)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061)  (cid:7367) (cid:7275)(cid:7061) (cid:7016) 
  (cid:7079)    (cid:7275)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)        , (cid:7079)(cid:7009) 
 (cid:7079)(cid:7009)        (cid:7409)  81        
(3)     (cid:7007)       (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) ,     (cid:6981)  
  (cid:7407) 
(4)  (cid:7408) -    (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:6979) (cid:7367) 
 (cid:7409)  81     (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) , (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)   (cid:6989) (cid:7021) 
 (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   ,      (cid:6989)   (cid:7407) 
(5)   (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7418)   (cid:7004)     (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  
  (cid:7373) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)  81     (cid:7408)  ,      (cid:7021) 
  (cid:7275)(cid:7061)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7418)   (cid:7004)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) 
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7021)      (cid:7021)   (cid:7418)   (cid:7004)  , (cid:7286)   
 (cid:7407)   
(6) , (cid:6996)      (cid:7408)     (cid:7408)       (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  
(cid:7008)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7418)   (cid:7004)     (cid:7373) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:7286)   

60.   (cid:7409)  82        (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) : (1)   (cid:7409)  82    
(cid:7407)    (cid:7409) ,  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7367)    
(2) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7409) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7286)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021)    (cid:7407)

(3)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7286)     (cid:6979)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  
(4)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7079) (cid:7088)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7004)  
(cid:7079) (cid:6981)     

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(5) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)   (cid:7016)    (cid:7367)           (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  
  
(6) (cid:6981)  ,    (cid:7409)     (cid:7407)   (cid:7007)   ,  (cid:7299)(cid:7275)  (cid:7286),  (cid:7008) 
  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7407)      
(7)  (cid:7079) (cid:7088) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)  82 (cid:7409)  (3)     (cid:7286)
  (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7277)   ,  (cid:7079) (cid:7088) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)   (cid:7021)    (cid:6980) 
 (cid:7079)..(cid:7407).  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)  (cid:7287)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:6981) 
(8)  (cid:6981)    (cid:6996)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7407)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)    (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) 
 (cid:7287)   , (cid:7079)   
(9) -   (cid:7286), (cid:6981) (cid:7021)    (cid:6996)   (cid:7409)     (cid:7409)  82 (cid:7409)  (3) 
 (cid:7079)..(cid:7407).  (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6979) (cid:7021) (cid:7069) 
(10)     (cid:7409)  82 (cid:7409)  21(2)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:6994)  (cid:7298)   
(cid:6981)   (cid:7414) (cid:7408)  ,   (cid:7407)                (cid:7298)
   (cid:7277) (cid:6989)   (cid:7414) 
(cid:7007) -9

61. (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7275)(cid:7018)(cid:6981)  : (1)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7013)      (cid:7021)  
    (cid:7298)     (cid:6979) (cid:7011)   
(2)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7367) (cid:6979)  (cid:7011)     (cid:7407) (cid:7286)    
(cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7277)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7011)    ,   
(cid:7021)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7009)   (cid:7021)   
(3) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6981)(cid:7018)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7286) (cid:7013)   (cid:7298) :
(i)   (cid:7079)(cid:7298)      (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7019)  ;
(ii) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7019)  ;
(iii) (cid:7298)        (cid:7009) , (cid:7021) ,    (cid:7409) (cid:7410) ;
(iv) (cid:7298)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7079) ;
(v) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7016)   (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7079) ;
(vi) (cid:7021) , (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:7004)  (cid:6981)(cid:7298),   (cid:6981)(cid:7298), (cid:6981)(cid:7298)
 (cid:7079)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  , (cid:6981)(cid:7008)   (cid:7008)  ;
(vii) (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7418)  (cid:7059)    (cid:7408)    ;
(viii)  (cid:7277) (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)    ;
(ix)   (cid:7408)(cid:6981), (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981) (cid:7019)  ;
(x)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   (cid:7020) (cid:7069) (cid:7004)   ;
(xi) (cid:7298)         ;
(xii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7009)  (cid:7021) , (cid:6981)   ,   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 40 (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    
(cid:7408) (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7277)      (cid:6981) 
  (cid:7007)  (cid:7286) ;
(xiii) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)  ;
(xiv)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)   ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 47
(xv)          (cid:6979) ;
(xvi)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   ;
(xvii)  (cid:7286)  -  ;
(xviii) (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6991)  ,  (cid:7079) (cid:7011)      (cid:7079)  (cid:7408)
;
(xix)   ,  -, (cid:7008) (cid:6981)(cid:7298), (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7079) ;
(xx)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7289)(cid:7410) (cid:7019)  ;
(xxi) (cid:6989)  (cid:6979)   ;
(xxii)   (cid:7021) (cid:7312)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6979)  ;
(xxiii) (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7414)    (cid:7062) (cid:6981) ;
(xxiv)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7062),   (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:7289)(cid:7410) (cid:7019)  ;
(xxv) (cid:7298) (cid:7298)       (cid:7019)  ;
(xxvi)     (cid:7298)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   ;
(xxvii)     (cid:7004)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7074) ;
(xxviii)  (cid:7298)   39   (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:7286)    (cid:7019)   (cid:7079)
;
(xxix)  (cid:7298)   39   (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7004) 
(cid:7019)  ;
(xxx)   (cid:7019)   (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)    (cid:6979)    (cid:6981) , (cid:7008)  
 ;
(xxxi)  (cid:7019)     (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7272)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7016)   
 (cid:7008)  (cid:7019)       ,   (cid:6979)     (cid:6996) 
 (cid:7079) (cid:7286)  --(cid:6979)    (cid:7008) ;
(xxxii) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7019) 
  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7289)
(4)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)        (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7408) (cid:7408) (cid:7286)    (cid:7008)   
(cid:6979)          (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7013)    (cid:7286)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)
 (cid:7407)(cid:7009)   (cid:6981)  :
(i) -  (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   ;
(ii)   (cid:6979);
(iii)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)   (cid:7074);
(iv) (cid:7378) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) -  (cid:6979);
(v) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7286) -  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7079);
(vi) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407)  (cid:7018) ;
(vii) (cid:6979) (cid:7079), 
(viii) (cid:7298), (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  
(5)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) 
(cid:6981) (cid:7409) ,   (cid:7079) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(6)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  ,  (cid:6981)    
 (cid:6979)    (cid:7408) 
(7) (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)       (cid:7011)   ,  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6981)(cid:7018)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367)  
(cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:7020) (cid:7408) (cid:7408) 
62. (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)(cid:7018) : (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7016)       (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
 (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7287) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008)  
(2) (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981) (cid:7019) 
   (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:6981)(cid:7312)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  
(3) (cid:7016)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)        (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7011)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7074)  
(cid:7409)   (cid:7020)   (cid:7263)          (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) 
(4)   (cid:7016)      (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7263)   (cid:7016) 
   (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:6979)(cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409)      (cid:7407),
(cid:7021) (cid:7298),  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7090)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7278)    (cid:7407)  (cid:7409)        (cid:7079)
(cid:7061) ,  (cid:7008)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7074)     15 (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   
(cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(5)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7301)    (cid:7016) 
   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7312),    (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    
(cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7301)     (cid:7013) 

(6)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:7301)  , (cid:7016)     (cid:6981) (cid:6981)
(cid:7013)  (cid:6981)  :
(i)  (cid:7409)    ;
(ii) (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979) (cid:6981)   ;
(iii)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)          (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)    
 (cid:6979)  ;
(iv)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979), (cid:7016)    (cid:7019)  ;    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)        (cid:7409)
      (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)        (cid:7408) (cid:7286)       (cid:7409)
;
(v)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979), (cid:7018)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7004)  (cid:7021)       (cid:7271)   (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7286)
   (cid:7286)  (cid:7074) ;
(vi) (cid:7272) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     ,   (cid:7016)   (cid:6979) ;
(vii) (cid:7407)(cid:7300)  (cid:7007)       (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7409)     (cid:7409)
  (cid:7286)    (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7 (cid:7286) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)         (cid:7016)    
(cid:6981)(cid:6981),      (cid:7286)  , (cid:6981), (cid:6980)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7390)(cid:6989)   (cid:6981)   ;
(viii) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      ,     (cid:7408)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)       ;
(ix)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7408)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7298)       (cid:7286)   (cid:6981)(cid:7312) 
  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ;
(x) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:6981)(cid:7008)    (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7408) (cid:7019)  , (cid:7079)  
  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7 (cid:7286) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     / (cid:7408)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)   ;
(xi)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)      (cid:7286)  (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 49
(xii)    (cid:7008) , , (cid:6979), (cid:7018)   (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7008) (cid:7286) (cid:7301) 
(cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:6979) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  ;
(xiii) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)      (cid:7011)     (cid:7407)(cid:7288)
(cid:7409)  (cid:7409)  ,  ;
(xiv)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   ,  (cid:7409)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7286), (cid:7408)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6979) , (cid:7019) 
(cid:7407)(cid:6981)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7286) (cid:6989)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079) ;
(xv) (cid:7407)-(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)     (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)    
(cid:7004)    (cid:6981) (cid:7079)  ;
(xvi)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) ;
(xvii)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)             (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)     , 
     (cid:6979)  (cid:7008)     (cid:7408)  , (cid:7407)(cid:7288) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ;
(xviii)    (cid:7277)   , (cid:7021) , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) ,  ,    (cid:7021)  
  ;
(xix) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:6979)      (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)     
  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:6989)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    
  (cid:7408) ;
(xx) -   (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   ;
(xxi)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) (cid:7301)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
(7)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409)       (cid:6981) (cid:7301)
 ,   (cid:7408) (cid:7286)   ,   (cid:7409)        (cid:7409)     (cid:7016)   
 (cid:6981)(cid:6981) -(cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)  
(8)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)       (cid:6981)    (cid:6981) (cid:7301)  , (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  
  (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)  
63.       (cid:6981)(cid:7018) :.—(1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7287) (cid:7298)   /
(2)        (cid:6981)(cid:7018) , (cid:6981)  (cid:7004) (cid:7004)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7298):
(i)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7009)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7018)  ;
(ii)  (cid:7409)       (cid:7016)  (cid:7019)  ;
(iii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7298), (cid:7079) (cid:7061)       (cid:6979)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  
(cid:7019)  (cid:7061) (cid:7011)  ;
(iv)    (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)   (cid:7378) (cid:7414)   (cid:7409) :(cid:7414) ;
(v)  (cid:7298)     ;
(vi)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   (cid:7286);
(vii) (cid:6979)   (cid:7409)     - (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   ;
(viii) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)(cid:6981)  (cid:6979)(cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:7008)   (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7019)  ;
(ix)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6979)  (cid:6979) (cid:7409)   ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(x) (cid:7298) ,    (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:6979)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7408) (cid:7079)    
(cid:7021)    (cid:7289), (cid:6981)(cid:6979) ;
(xi) (cid:7079)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    (cid:7016)    (cid:7301)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)   
 ;
(xii)  (cid:6981)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   ; 
(xiii)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) (cid:7301)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
64. (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:7018) :.—(1)  (cid:7409)  13 (cid:7409) - (1)   (ii)      (cid:7016) 
   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   , (cid:6981)  (cid:7408) (cid:7407)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408) , (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)
(cid:7409)    (cid:6981) (cid:7367)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7289) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 6 (cid:7286)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(2)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7004)       (cid:7298)    (cid:7016)  (cid:7286) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7272)  (cid:7021) (cid:7020)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7018)     (cid:7271) (cid:6981)(cid:7312), (cid:7021)  (cid:7298),  (cid:7312)
   (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) , (cid:7298)   (cid:7312)  (cid:7263),   (cid:7018)     (cid:7061)  (cid:7079)
(cid:6979) (cid:7409)   
(3) (cid:7407)(cid:6979) , (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)    (cid:7298)     (cid:7013)  (cid:6981)(cid:7018) (cid:7298), (cid:7300)  (cid:7004) (cid:7004) (cid:7298) 
(cid:6981)  :
(i) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 6 (cid:7286)    (cid:7008)  ;
(ii) (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)      (cid:6979) , (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ;
(iii)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7021) (cid:7020)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   ;
(iv) (cid:7008) , , (cid:6979), (cid:7018)   (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  ;
(v)          (cid:7021)  ;
(vi)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)    (cid:7079) ;
(vii) (cid:7407)-(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)       (cid:6981) (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)      (cid:7407)  
(cid:7004)    (cid:6981) (cid:7079)   (cid:7289);
(viii)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  , (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6996) (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298) 
 (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  ;
(ix) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7019)  (cid:6981) (cid:7019)     (cid:7021) (cid:6994) 
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  ;
(x)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7278) (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7409)   (cid:6981)   ;
(xi)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:7407) (cid:7019)    ;
(xii) (cid:7407)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)       (cid:6981)(cid:6979) ;
(xiii)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)       (cid:7021)    (cid:7378)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7007)    , 
   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 10 (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:7288) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ;
(xiv)    , (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) , (cid:7021) , (cid:7079)(cid:6979) ,  , (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6989)     
 ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 51
(xv) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)     (cid:7016)    -  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  
   (cid:7008)  (cid:7061) ;
(xvi)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286),  (cid:7277)  (cid:7008) (cid:7367)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)  , (cid:7300)  (cid:6981) ;
(xvii)    (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298),  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981),  (cid:7367)
(cid:7408)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7300)         (cid:7021)  
 ;
(xviii)  (cid:7312)  (cid:7016)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407)   (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)   (cid:6981)     
(cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)   (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  ; 
(xix) (cid:7301)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
65.  (cid:6981) --(cid:7021)   :.—(1)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286), (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  , (cid:6981)--(cid:7021)  
 (cid:7408) 
(2) (cid:6981)--(cid:7021)      (cid:6981)    (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7061)  (cid:6981),   
   (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)     (cid:6981)    
(3) (cid:6981)--(cid:7021)   (cid:7013)  (cid:7300)  (cid:6981) :
(i) (cid:6989)  (cid:7074)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7016)  ,  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) , (cid:6981)  (cid:7018)    
 (cid:6981)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)    (cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) ;
(ii)      (cid:7353)(cid:7059)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)    (cid:7018)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7289),
(cid:6981)(cid:7407)    (cid:6981)  ;
(iii) (cid:7021) -   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   (cid:7079)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)   
(cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298), (cid:7299)(cid:7298), (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981) ;
(iv)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) , (cid:6979), (cid:7271)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  
  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298), (cid:7299)(cid:7298), (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   
  (cid:7008)  ;
(v) (cid:7018)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7074)(cid:7298)      
(cid:7079)  (cid:7289);
(vi) (cid:7021) -   (cid:7378)     (cid:7004)    (cid:6981)  ;
(vii)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7312)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)    ;
(viii) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)      (cid:7367) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     
 (cid:7079)    (cid:7407)(cid:7288) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ;
(ix) (cid:6979)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7353)(cid:7059)    (cid:7079)(cid:7074) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7286)   ;
(x) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7074)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7019)     (cid:7079) ;
(xi) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)     (cid:7011)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:7312)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  , 
 (cid:7021) (cid:7409)(cid:7298)  (cid:7312)   (cid:7286) (cid:7272)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7263)  ;
(xii)     (cid:7013)  (cid:7407)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7018) (cid:7334)(cid:7004)  ,  
, (cid:7021)  ,  (cid:7079)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:7407) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  ; 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(xiii) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)     (cid:6979)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7298)  
    (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  
66. (cid:7414)   :.— (1) (cid:6981)(cid:7018)  (cid:7409)  (cid:6979), (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)       
 (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373)  (cid:7004)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)

(2)    (cid:7021)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7277) 
(3)    (cid:7021)    (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7373) (cid:7021)  (cid:7277) 
(4)    (cid:7021)    (cid:6981),      (cid:7357)     ,    (cid:7021)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)
, , , (cid:7013)    (cid:7018)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7277)   (cid:7408) 
(cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7357)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7277) 
(5)    (cid:7021)    (cid:6981) (cid:7408)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7277)      (cid:7408)  (cid:7277)    
   -    (cid:7018)  (cid:7277) 
(6)    (cid:7021)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7020)    (cid:7079) (cid:7277) 
 -(cid:6989)    (cid:6981) (cid:7277)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7061) (cid:7277)    (cid:7019)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7277) 
67.  (cid:6979)  :- (1)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7088), (cid:7298)   (cid:6981),   (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) 
     (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7263) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7286) (cid:6979) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:6989)  
(2) (cid:6979) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:6989)   , (cid:6981)    (cid:7007)     (cid:7367)   (cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7278) (cid:7408)
 (cid:6981) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  
(3) (cid:7408)(cid:7298)       (cid:7021) (cid:7286),    (cid:7021)    (cid:6979) (cid:6981)    (cid:7271) (cid:6979)
(cid:7300)    (cid:6979)    
(4) (cid:7408)   (cid:7407)(cid:7021)    (cid:6979) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)   
(5)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7013)   (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7289) :
(i) (cid:6979)     (cid:6981)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  -
 (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7408) 
(ii)      (cid:7286) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   ,   (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7019)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7079)
(cid:7018) (cid:6989)  ,   (cid:7019)  ,    (cid:7004)  (cid:6989)   
(iii)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367) (cid:7357) (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)      (cid:7021) (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7004) (cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7414)
(cid:7408) 
(6) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7008)  (cid:6981), (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)       , 
    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6980) (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019)    (cid:7019)      
  (cid:7409)   -  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)     
(7)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7286),      , (cid:7408) (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7277),
 (cid:6979)    (cid:7079)    (cid:7367)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6979)      
 (cid:7407)(cid:7009)   
(8)    (cid:7021)      (cid:7286),  (cid:7079) (cid:7004)    (cid:7021)     
(9)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7410)     (cid:7286),  ,  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7409)
     (cid:7298)    

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 53
(10) (cid:7079)      (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7286),   (cid:6996)   (cid:7079) (cid:7079) (cid:7367)
  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)      (cid:7079)    (cid:7298)    (cid:6979)   (cid:6989) 

(11) (cid:6989)  (cid:7298)      (cid:7407)(cid:7298), (cid:7298)  (cid:7300)       (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:6981)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7390)(cid:7407) (cid:7012)    (cid:7408) 
(12) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7407)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7263)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)     (cid:7410)(cid:7312) , (cid:7021) 
(cid:6979), (cid:7298), , -   (cid:6979), , (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7410)(cid:7312)  (cid:7079) (cid:7008) (cid:7312)   (cid:7407)
 (cid:7298)   
(13) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)    (cid:6989)   
68.   (cid:7061).—(1) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7079)  (cid:7408) (cid:7019)  ,    (cid:7373)
(cid:7021) (cid:7312) , (cid:7408)   ,(cid:7289) (cid:7061)  
(2) (cid:7061)   (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) :
(i)        (cid:7373) (cid:7021)    (cid:7367) (cid:7061) (cid:7409)    (cid:7011)  (cid:7409)
  (cid:7409) ;
(ii)     (cid:7286) , (cid:7021) (cid:7074),   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  
(cid:7298)      (cid:6981)     (cid:7286),    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7021) 
  (cid:7004)    (cid:7013)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)       ;
(iii)     (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7062)(cid:7062) (cid:6981)     ;
(iv) (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7061) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7061) (cid:7409)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7021)    
(cid:6981) (cid:7272)    ;
(v) (cid:6996)   (cid:7013)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373), (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)       
(cid:7367)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)       (cid:7021)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373)  (cid:6981) ;
(vi) (cid:7013)     (cid:7286) (cid:6981)       (cid:7298)   (cid:7409)  
(3) (cid:7061) (cid:7409)   (cid:7021) (cid:7312) ,   (cid:7409) (cid:7020)     (cid:7408) (cid:7061) (cid:7409)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7408)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373)
(cid:7408)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7008)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7272) (cid:7277) , (cid:6979) (cid:7008)   
 (cid:7020)   (cid:7021) (cid:7407)  (cid:7408) 
69. (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) .—
. (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7021)      (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:7334) (cid:7367)  (cid:7079) 
(cid:7008)   (cid:7367),  (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)   , (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408) 
(2) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) (cid:7021)      (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286), (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)
  (cid:7079)       (cid:6981)          (cid:7408)    (cid:6981)
   (cid:6979)  
.    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7079) .—(1)   (cid:7016)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7286),    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)
(cid:7298)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7289):
(i) (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979);
(ii)    (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iii) (cid:6981) 
(2)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286),    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7289):
(i)    (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  ;
(ii) (cid:6981) 
.  (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979) .—(1)     (cid:6981) (cid:7367)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) (cid:7263) (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 41 (cid:7286) (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979)
(cid:6981)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) (cid:7263) (cid:6979)  (cid:6979)  
(2)   (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)      (cid:7367) -   (cid:7021) (cid:7407) 
(3)        
.     (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  .—(1)    (cid:7079)    (cid:7079)    (cid:7016) (cid:7079) 
  (cid:7021)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7021)       (cid:7407)  
(2)     20.00      (cid:7408) 14.00     
(3) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)       (cid:7016)   (cid:7367)    (cid:6979)(cid:7004)        
      (cid:7021) (cid:7286)     (cid:7409)        (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7286)  
       (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) 
(4)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7286)   , (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 42 
(cid:7079)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)    (cid:7021)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  ,  (cid:7079)  (cid:7016)   
    (cid:7079) (cid:6981)         (cid:7061) (cid:7409) 
(5)    (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)     (cid:7016)    (cid:7079) (cid:7286) (cid:7301) (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7334)  (cid:7016)    (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   
(6) (cid:7408)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7416)(cid:7020)      (cid:7079) (cid:7277)  ,    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) 
(cid:7005) (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7263) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     (cid:6981)    (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) 
(7)  (cid:7407)(cid:7009)   (cid:7263) (cid:7408)      (cid:6979)(cid:7004)     (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)  ,   (cid:7011) , (cid:7079) 
(cid:7349) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7020)  (cid:7408) 
(8)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407) (cid:7272)        (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  , (cid:7408)    ,  (cid:7016) 
     (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) , (cid:7301) (cid:7408)     (cid:7021)(cid:7312)  (cid:7061)    (cid:7061) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)    
(9)  , (cid:7408)   ,  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7007)  (cid:7408) ,       (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
(10)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7333)  (cid:7286),     
.  (cid:6981)  .—(1)       (cid:7367)   (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7367)   
(cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  
(2)   (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 14 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7408) (cid:6981)
    (cid:7008)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7286) (cid:7020)    (cid:7367)     (cid:7408)  
.   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) .—(1) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7013) 
(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)    :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 55
(i)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7349) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7020)  (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)    ,(cid:7286)  (cid:7409)
(cid:7407) (cid:7409)    ;
(ii)    (cid:7409) (cid:7019)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:7021) (cid:7020)      (cid:7020)   (cid:7013)     (cid:7007)   (cid:7263) (cid:7409)
     (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7298)   72 (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)     (cid:7408)
  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) (cid:7367)   ;
(iii)  , (cid:7408)   , (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7007)  (cid:7408) ,       (cid:7079) (cid:7408) ;
(iv)    (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005) , ,  ,   (cid:7018)    (cid:7004)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019)  ,
(cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7079) (cid:7409) ;
(v)   (cid:7272)  (cid:7022)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286), (cid:7408)   (cid:7059)     (cid:7061)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)
        (cid:7409) (cid:7272) ,  (cid:7408) ;
(vi)   (cid:6979)  (cid:6979)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  , (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7004)   
(cid:7019)    (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:7009)    (cid:7005)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7272)(cid:7272)
(cid:7277) ,      (cid:7016)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7301)  , (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(cid:7407)(cid:7009)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   
(2)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      (cid:7408)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7272)   
 (cid:7286)  (cid:6989)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7408) ,    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)   
.   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)        (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) .—(1) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)  ,  (cid:7408)  
(cid:7408) (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   :
(i)          (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)        (cid:7011)     (cid:6981) (cid:7286)
   (cid:7079) (cid:7059)(cid:7408)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:6981)      - 
 (cid:6979)       (cid:7079)   (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7409) ;
(ii)   (cid:7021)        (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)   30    
(cid:7079) (cid:7021) , (cid:7298)   , (cid:7021)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7061)   , (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  
(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7298)   30   -  :(cid:7414) (cid:7409) ;
(iii)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7278) (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7021)   (cid:6981) ,
 (cid:7013)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298) , (cid:7407) :-
() (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005) , (cid:7021) (cid:6994)   ;
()    (cid:7021)     ;
()    (cid:6981)   (cid:6981); 
()    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) , (cid:7004) (cid:7004)   (cid:6981)(cid:7018)  
(iv)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7367) (cid:6979) (cid:7408)     (cid:7021)(cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)        
(cid:7022)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:7009)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    ,     (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004) 
 (cid:7286)  ;
(v) (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
.   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7408)      (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) .— (1)   (cid:7016)   
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)     ,   (cid:6981) 
(2)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7408)  , (cid:7408) (cid:6979) ,   (cid:6981)    (cid:7286)    
 (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7004)   (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  (cid:7016)     (cid:7409) (cid:7407), (cid:7408)(cid:7004) , (cid:6980) (cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7018)  (cid:7021) 
   (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298)   (cid:7367) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) 
(3)     (cid:7408)   (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   , 
(cid:7277) (cid:7011)  (cid:7289), (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:7004)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 43 (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   
    -  (cid:7298), , (cid:7021) , (cid:7074)(cid:7298), (cid:6989)        (cid:7011)  (cid:7090)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7007)   (cid:7074) (cid:7409) 
(4)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7008)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)(cid:7312) 
(cid:6979)(cid:7004) (cid:7298)      (cid:6979) (cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7018)  (cid:7271)  (cid:7016)     (cid:7286),  (cid:6980)(cid:7298)
  (cid:7407) (cid:7016)  (cid:7298), (cid:6980)(cid:7298), (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298),  (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298), (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)
  - (cid:7298)   (cid:7019)  (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) 
.   (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7009)      (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) .—(1)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7407)
(cid:7408)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7020)  (cid:7021) ,   (cid:7007)    
(2)     (cid:7013)     (cid:7408) :
(i) ;
(ii)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079);
(iii)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)   (cid:7021) ;
(iv) (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) (cid:7272) ,   (cid:7286)   
(3)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7367)    (cid:6981)(cid:7004) , (cid:6979)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7271)   
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 7  (cid:7286) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)    ,(cid:7286)     (cid:7409) (cid:6981)  
 (cid:7272) (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7353)(cid:7059), (cid:7407), (cid:7407)   (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)    
(cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)      (cid:7019)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7408) 
(4)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7409) (cid:6979)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7009) (cid:7298), 
  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)        (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981)
(cid:7286)   
(5)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)       (cid:7407)  (cid:7407)  
   (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)      
(6)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7079)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7312)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7367) (cid:7409)  
 -   (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)     
(7) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7409) (cid:7271)    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7286) (cid:7286)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286) (cid:6979) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7409)   (cid:6981)(cid:7009)    (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409) 
.        (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) .—(1) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)       (cid:7374)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7023) (cid:7298)  
(cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7286)  
(2)  (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7079)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 57
(3) (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) -(cid:6981)  , (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7286) (cid:6989)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7409)
(cid:7408)(cid:6981)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7408)       
(cid:7408)(cid:6981)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14 (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)

. (cid:7407)- (cid:6981) .— (1) (cid:7407)-(cid:6981)   -(cid:7407) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   (cid:7298),  (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7349)
(cid:7408)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) 
(2)  (cid:7367)        (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)       (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286), (cid:7079) 
(cid:7367)   (cid:7407) , (cid:7408)  ,          (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298) , (cid:7408)  
, (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)       ,    ,  
.    (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)(cid:7408) (cid:6981).—(1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  ,    (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)      (cid:7079)  
       
(2) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)(cid:6981)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7020)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7414) (cid:7408) 
(3) (cid:7408)(cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  -    , (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   , (cid:7407) (cid:7018) ,
, (cid:6979) (cid:6979), (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979), (cid:7407)   ,  (cid:6979),  (cid:6981), (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  
    (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298)    (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:7298)
.   (cid:7018)  .—(1)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)     
(cid:7008) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7298)
(2) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021) (cid:6981) (cid:7018)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:6980)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7263)  
 (cid:7021) (cid:7020)         (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)       (cid:7079)
 (cid:7367)     (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7286)       (cid:7409)  (cid:6981) (cid:7020)  , (cid:6981) 
   (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7312)     (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)
    (cid:7079)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  .
(3) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  
(4) (cid:7079)   (cid:7409) (cid:7312)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7013)    (cid:7007)    (cid:7263) (cid:7016)   (cid:7298) 
(cid:6989)  (cid:7272)  
(5) (cid:7079)  (cid:7021)      (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)     (cid:6981),    (cid:7021)  (cid:7373)
(cid:7408) -  (cid:7409)    
(6)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)     
(cid:7408)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)   
. (cid:7021)  (cid:6981) (cid:7018)      (cid:7409)  .—(1) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981) (cid:7016)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7074)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7272)
  (cid:7013)  (cid:7286)       :
(i) (cid:7407) ;
(ii)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    (cid:6981) (cid:7301);
(iii)   (cid:6981) -   (cid:7408)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)   ; 
(iv) (cid:7298) (cid:6981)    (cid:7409) ,  (cid:6981)(cid:7298)    (cid:7409) ,    
(cid:7008)  (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2)    (cid:7407)     (cid:7013)   (cid:7079)    (cid:7018)   (cid:7408)  
(cid:7004)     (cid:7277) (cid:7408) 
.  (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)  .—(cid:7013)   (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)   , (cid:6981) :
(i)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  ,   (cid:7298)     (cid:7408)(cid:6981)   ;
(ii) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:7021) (cid:6981) (cid:7018)      (cid:7410)   ;
(iii)      (cid:6981) (cid:7407)   ,    (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)  ;
(iv) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7079)(cid:7298)  ,  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7286)
  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7289),       (cid:7018)    (cid:7408) ;
(v)      (cid:7409) (cid:7408)    (cid:7286) (cid:7016)      ;
(vi)  (cid:7079)(cid:7373)  (cid:7373) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)      ;
(vii)     (cid:7286)   (cid:7409)  ;
(viii)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979),  (cid:7018)   (cid:6981) (cid:7000)(cid:7059)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981) ;
(ix) (cid:7004)    (cid:7018) ;
(x)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)    
.         (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)  .—(cid:7079)  (cid:7367) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7367) -
 (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7409)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6994)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7408) 
 (cid:7407)    (cid:7021)          -     (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009) 
   (cid:7408) 
70. (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021)   .—(1)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021)  (cid:7277) , (cid:6981):-
(i) (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) , :(cid:7079) (cid:6981), , , , (cid:7409), (cid:7021)  (cid:7408);
(ii)  (cid:7021) ,  (cid:6981),   ,      (cid:7408)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7298);
(iii)  (cid:6991) (cid:7021) (cid:7074), (cid:7021) (cid:7074)-(cid:7021) (cid:7074)  ,        (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286)
    (cid:7289);
(iv)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7061);
(v) , (cid:7021) ,   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)      (cid:7021)     (cid:7272) (cid:7286)     ;
(vi) , , , , , (cid:7306), (cid:7004)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7349);
(vii)     (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7061);
(viii) (cid:7013)    (cid:7021) ,     (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7021) ;
(ix)   (cid:7020) (cid:7272)  (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7277) (cid:7409)  (cid:7289);
(x)  (cid:7004)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7367) (cid:7008)      (cid:7367) (cid:7408)(cid:7414)(cid:7020)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7021) 
(2)  -, , (cid:6989) , , , (cid:7076) , (cid:7079)   ,  , - (cid:7408) 
(cid:6989) (cid:7069)    (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7016)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 59
(3) (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)    (cid:7298)   72   (cid:7408) 
71.     (cid:6979)     (cid:7021)   :- (1) (cid:7079)   (cid:7019)   (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:7408) 
 (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409)   ,  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:6979) (cid:7408)        (cid:7408)  
(cid:7016)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)   (cid:7312) (cid:7409)    (cid:7286),  (cid:6981) (cid:7367)
    (cid:7408)      , (cid:7263)(cid:7016)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) "(cid:7018) (cid:6989) 
 (cid:7021) ” (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7414)(cid:7020)  
(2) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7020)   (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   
   (cid:7079)(cid:7020) (cid:7298)     (cid:7079)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)     (cid:7079)(cid:7020) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)
(cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) 
72. (cid:7021)(cid:7312)   :- (1)     (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7013)     (cid:7408) , (cid:6981) :
(i) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   , (cid:7079)   (cid:7409)      (cid:7286)  ;
(ii) (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7289), (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)  ;
(iii)      (cid:7021)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7407) (cid:7408)  ,   , (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) ,  (cid:6981)
    ,     (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7021) (cid:7407) (cid:7408) , (cid:7286)   
(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  ;
(iv)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407) , (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)      (cid:7286) 
 (cid:7021)   -   ,      (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7020)  (cid:7409)  
-   (cid:7367) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) ;
(v)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)    ,   (cid:7367)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)      (cid:7286)
  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)   -    (cid:7301) ;
(vi)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    , (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7409)   ; 
(vii) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)      (cid:7409)     (cid:7409)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7277)  , 
 (cid:7409) (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7286)     (cid:7298)   39   (cid:7079) 
(cid:7367)   (cid:7019)     (cid:7408) 
73.  (cid:7409)    :- (1)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)   

(2)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)       (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:6981)    
(cid:7008)   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) 
(3)   (cid:7286) (cid:7013)    (cid:6981):
(i)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:6981)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ;
(ii)   (cid:7367)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7408)     (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079);
(iii)   (cid:7074), (cid:7408) (cid:7011)  ;
(iv)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7409) (cid:6989)    ;
(v)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7079)(cid:7074);
(vi)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408) (cid:7004)  (cid:7272) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(vii) (cid:7079) , (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:7016)  , (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(viii) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7409)  , (cid:7408)   ;
(ix)   (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981),  (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298), (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298), , (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    
(cid:7090)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  ;
(x) , (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7090);
(xi) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xii) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981), (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xiii) - (cid:7079)(cid:7410),  (cid:6981) (cid:7407)(cid:7288),  (cid:7277)  ,  (cid:7021) (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7409)  (cid:7008) ;
(xiv) (cid:7373)(cid:7011)  (.(cid:6989) .) (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:6981), (cid:7271) (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:6981), (cid:6980)(cid:7004)  (cid:7016) , (cid:6979)  (cid:7018)  (cid:6979)(cid:7312) (cid:7409),
(cid:7408)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7289), (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xv) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059)        (cid:7286)  ;
(xvi) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079);
(xvii)  (cid:7409)      (cid:7409) (cid:7079);
(xviii) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7349)  (cid:7008)  ;
(xix) (cid:6981) (cid:6981) ;
(xx)  (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxi)   (cid:7407)-(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059), (cid:7407)     (cid:7278)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7286)
;
(xxii)    (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) (cid:6979)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxiii)      (cid:7407)(cid:7298)     ;
(xxiv)  (cid:7409) (cid:7298)    (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxv)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7409);
(xxvi) (cid:7349)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7407);
(xxvii)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)       (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)     ;
(xxviii)  (cid:7021)      (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxix) (cid:7408) (cid:7021) (cid:6981) (cid:7018)   (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxx) (cid:7408)  (cid:7018)   (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxxi)  (cid:7011)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7016) (cid:7016) , (cid:7408)  ;
(xxxii)   (cid:7021)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:7009)      -   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) ;
(xxxiii) (cid:7407)    ;
(xxxiv) (cid:6979)  , (cid:7408)  ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 61
(xxxv) (cid:6981) :(cid:6979)   (cid:6981) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxxvi) (cid:7407) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409) -(cid:7407)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xxxvii) (cid:7278) (cid:7407)(cid:7288);
(xxxviii) (cid:7414) ;
(xxxix) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)    (cid:7407)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7278) (cid:7407)(cid:6981);
(xl) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7367)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079); 
(xli) (cid:7407)(cid:7009) (cid:7298), (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)
(4)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) , (cid:7018)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)    (cid:7408)  
(cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7288)   (cid:7414)(cid:7020)  (cid:7298)
(5)      (cid:7004) (cid:7004)   (cid:7016)      (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  
(6) (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7286) (cid:7013) (cid:7009)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6996)      (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) 

74. (cid:7298)          (cid:7079)  :- (1)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298) 
(cid:7009)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7409)  :
 (cid:7020)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286),  -     (cid:6996)        (cid:7409) (cid:7074)   (cid:7289), (cid:7079)
  -  (cid:7298) , (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7020)       (cid:7286)    (cid:7018) (cid:6981)  
  (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7009)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7277) , (cid:7407) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)    (cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   
 
(2)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)    -    (cid:7407)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7082)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7408)
 (cid:7409)  
(3)  -  (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7410), (cid:7018) (cid:6981)    
(cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7286) (cid:7009)    , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021) (cid:7020)      
    (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7272)    (cid:7277) (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:7409)   (cid:7277)  
(4) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    -    (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7009)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7074)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7019)  
  (cid:7061) (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) (cid:7011)   
(5) (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7074)      (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)
 , (cid:7074)  (cid:6981)         (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)   (cid:6979) 
 (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)      (cid:7079) (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)      
(6) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7286),    ,    (cid:7079)    
(cid:7079)  (cid:7409)        (cid:7061) (cid:7408) (cid:7011)   
(7) (cid:7079) , (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)  (cid:7009)  (cid:7286) 
     -  (cid:7298)    (cid:7409)         (cid:7298)    

(8)     (cid:6994)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) ,    (cid:7079)         
(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7367) (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408)        (cid:7074) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   
   (cid:7021)  (cid:7367)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7079) (cid:7277)  ,       (cid:7408)


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(9)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7367)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ,   (cid:7409)    (cid:6981) (cid:7367) 

(10) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7409)
    (cid:7408)     (cid:7013)      (cid:7079) (cid:7021)    (cid:7408)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   
 (cid:7408)  (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021)       (cid:7286) (cid:6981) 
(11) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)      (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)      
        (cid:7021)  (cid:7277)  
(12) (cid:7408)       (cid:7286)  (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021)    :
(i) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7011)    ;
(ii) (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7263)    (cid:7013) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) ((cid:7298))       ;
(iii) (cid:7408) (cid:7013) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  ,(cid:7289)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409) ; 
(iv)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7407)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7003)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7061)
(cid:7408) 
(13) (cid:7408)       (cid:7286)  (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)(cid:7373) (cid:7021)     :
(i) (cid:7021)  (cid:7011)    ;
(ii) (cid:7408) - (cid:7021)       ,(cid:7286) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981) (cid:7408)  (cid:7008)  , (cid:7021)   
 (cid:7271)(cid:7373)              (cid:7021)     (cid:7301) (cid:7408) ;
(iii)     (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  ;
(iv)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7003)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7061) (cid:7408) ; 
(v) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  
(14)         (cid:7271)   ,       (cid:7079)  
  ,      (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)      (cid:7409) (cid:7079)
(cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  
(15) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7013)     (cid:7263)  (cid:6981)      :
(i)   (cid:7011)      (cid:6981)(cid:7312)    (cid:7298);
(ii)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979)(cid:7004)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) , (cid:7378)  (cid:6979)     (cid:7408)      
;
(iii)   (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)     (cid:6979)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:6994)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7367)
(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)    ,    (cid:6990)    (cid:7263)  (cid:7286)  ;
(iv) (cid:7408)     (cid:6989)  (cid:7277)     ,   (cid:6989) (cid:7312)   (cid:7409)   
(cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7286)    (cid:7021)    (cid:7289)
75.  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)   :- (1)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7004)    (cid:7004) (cid:7004)      (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)   :
(i) (cid:7021)    (cid:7019)    (cid:7408) (cid:7004)  (cid:6979)   (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7062) (cid:7409) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 63
(ii) (cid:7408) (cid:7079)    (cid:7061)(cid:7021)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  (cid:7409)  ,(cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   
(cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7286) (cid:7004)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7004)    (cid:7286)    (cid:7278)  ,
(cid:6981)       -  (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)   
(iii)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    
    (cid:7079)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7278)  , (cid:6981)       - 
(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)    
(iv) (cid:7408)    (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)       (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)    ,     (cid:7021) 
(cid:7079)     (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7278)  (cid:7021)      - 
(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7013)    
(v)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286) 
 (cid:7021) (cid:7069), , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)    (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7278)  (cid:7021) ,
(cid:7286) (cid:6979)  (cid:7004)     (cid:7409)          ,  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079) 
 (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7004)      (cid:7286)  , (cid:7408)  (cid:7298),   (cid:7286)   
(cid:7021) (cid:7069)    (cid:7286)
(vi)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7011) (cid:7298) 
 (cid:7286)   (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7367) (cid:7409)   (cid:7408)     (cid:7011)  (cid:7286) 
(vii)   (cid:7004)  (cid:6979)    ,     -    (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)
  (cid:7021)    (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7020)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    (cid:7061)       (cid:6980) (cid:6981) 
    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) 
76.    (cid:7018)  (cid:6981)    :- (1) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408)
     (cid:7018) (cid:6981), (cid:6979)       (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7018) (cid:6981), (cid:6979)
    (cid:6981)   (cid:7079) (cid:7298)    (cid:7018) (cid:6981)(cid:7298)     (cid:7289),  (cid:7289)
(2) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   
(cid:7407), (cid:7289)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981) :
(i) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)   (cid:7409) (cid:7312) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7004)
(cid:7079)   (cid:7409)  ;
(ii)  (cid:7407), (cid:7289)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)    , (cid:6981)  
 (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409) ,  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7272),  (cid:7008)      ;
(iii) (cid:6981)      (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7312)  (cid:7013)  (cid:6980)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7008)    
(cid:7021)      (cid:7408)      ;
(iv) (cid:6981)    (cid:7019)     (cid:7019)   (cid:7286) (cid:7408)        
  - (cid:6981) (cid:7011)   ;
(v) (cid:6981)      (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021) (cid:7407)  ;
(vi) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979)          (cid:7409)  (cid:7278)
(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(vii) (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7286), (cid:6981)    (cid:6980)  
(cid:7021)      (cid:7408)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   ;
(viii) (cid:6981)   (cid:7018) (cid:6981)    (cid:7005) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)     (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7407)    (cid:6981)
  - (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981)    (cid:7298)     (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:7298), 
  (cid:6980)(cid:7298),  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   
77. (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  :- (1)  (3) (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)        (cid:7298)   (cid:7021) 
(2) (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (4) (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  , (cid:7013)   :

(cid:7059).. (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  (cid:6979)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. (cid:7079)  (cid:7349) (cid:7021)   (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/(cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
(cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   
2. (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7079) 
3.    (cid:7079)  (cid:7079) 
4. (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)    (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
5.   / (cid:7079) 
6.   (cid:7021)    (cid:7079) 
7. (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  (cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
8.  (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
(cid:7021) 
9. (cid:7079) (cid:7301)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7079) 
10.  (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)   - (cid:7079) 
11. (cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7079) 
12.   (cid:7021)   (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
13. (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079) 
14.    (cid:7079) 
15.  (cid:7021) /    -  (cid:7079)
16. (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7021)  (cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
17.  (cid:7021)   (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
18.  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
19. (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7079) 
20.  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7079) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 65
21. (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079) 
22. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979) / (cid:7016)  / (cid:7079) 
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)
23. (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079) (cid:7079) 
24. (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7409)-- (cid:7079) 
25.  (cid:7021)  (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:6990)  (cid:7367)
78.   (cid:7414) :- (1) (cid:7021)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)   
(cid:7298)     (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:7298),  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312), (cid:7312)(cid:6981) ,
(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298), (cid:6979)(cid:7298)    (cid:7409)      (cid:7289)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979),
(cid:7016)     (cid:7007)   (cid:7263) (cid:6989)  ,    
(2)  - (1) (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7367)   ,(cid:7289)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)  
(cid:6981)  ,    ,      (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    (cid:7079)(cid:7009) 
 (cid:7298) 
(3)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)     (cid:7409)     (cid:7021) 
  (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)(cid:7059)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   
(4) (cid:7079)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7009) (cid:7298)       (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) 
(5) (cid:7079)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)     (cid:7298)       
79.    (cid:7021)     (cid:7409) (cid:7407) :- (1)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) 
(cid:7367)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7009)   (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)   
(2)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)     -      
-         (cid:7079)       (cid:7021) (cid:7286)    (cid:7408) (cid:7019)  ,
-   (cid:7409) (cid:7298)  (cid:7409) (cid:7074)   (cid:7409)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7074)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7018)     (cid:7409)
(cid:7407)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) -    (cid:7408) 
(3) (cid:7408) -  ,     (cid:7286)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7289),  
   (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7367)   ;     (cid:7286),   (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7367)     
 -/ (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7301)
(4) (cid:7407)  (cid:7349)  ,   (cid:6989)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7019)  (cid:7079) (cid:7061)   
(5)    (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     ,  (cid:7021) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7074) , ,  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)   
 (cid:7008)    (cid:7007) , (cid:7278)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  
(6) (cid:7408) (cid:7407) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7408)  ,     (cid:6981) (cid:7408) (cid:7349)  
  (cid:7349) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7020)  (cid:7409)  
(7)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7298) ,(cid:7286) (cid:6996)   (cid:7367) -   (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) 
(cid:6981)    /  (cid:7408),     
(8)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7407)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7277)      (cid:7409)   (cid:7009)   
  (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7271)    , (cid:7079) , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)    (cid:7007) , 
       (cid:7367)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021) (cid:7277)    ,       

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
80.  (cid:7298)     (cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) (cid:7272)  ,    
(cid:7021)     (cid:7272)  (cid:7061)(cid:7021)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7298)     :- (1) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) 
     (cid:7272)  (cid:7061)(cid:7021)     (cid:7016)   (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)     
(cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7272) (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7286) (cid:7018)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7289),      (cid:7409)        
      (cid:7019)  , (cid:6989)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)     (cid:7021)(cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6980) (cid:7367)
(cid:7079) (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)    (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7367)   (cid:7409)  
(2)    (cid:7407)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)     , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   
   (cid:7286)         ,        (cid:7408)      
  (cid:7286)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7277) ,  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7409) (cid:7349)     
(3) (cid:6996)   (cid:7018)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6989)   (cid:7298)     (cid:7408) (cid:6981) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)   
81.   (cid:7021)  :- (1)   , (cid:7408)      (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:6979)(cid:7074)    (cid:7021) 
 ,  (cid:6981)     (cid:7021)       (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7298) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7373) (cid:7408) , (cid:6996)      (cid:6979)    
(2) (cid:7006)   (cid:6979)  :
(i) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)   ,  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)     (cid:6981)   (cid:7367)   (cid:7021)   
(cid:7408)  , (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  ; 
(ii) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)      (cid:7021)        (cid:6979)     , 
(cid:7409)  (cid:7079)  
(3)   (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7416)(cid:7020) : (cid:7021)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:7018)   (cid:7408)      
(cid:7074) (cid:7004)   (cid:6981) (cid:6981)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408)    (cid:6996)  (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408) 
   (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  
(4)  (cid:7021)  ,  (cid:7409)           
(5)       (cid:7407) , (cid:6981)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7004)  (cid:6996)  
    (cid:7074)   (cid:7074)  (cid:6981) ,    , (cid:7062)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7272)  
(6) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6981)   (cid:7272) (cid:7408)    (cid:7409)   ,      (cid:7021) (cid:7286)   
(7)    (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6981)  (cid:7018)   (cid:6996)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  
82.      (cid:6981) :- (1) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) ,    -   (cid:7409) 
   -        (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   (cid:7020)     
  (cid:7021) (cid:7286)    (cid:7409) (cid:7407)   (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 44 (cid:7286)    
(2)        (cid:7407)  , (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:6989)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  
  (cid:7008)      (cid:7409)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979) ,  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7016) 
   (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7300)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7008) (cid:7079)
(cid:7021)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    
(3)      (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981) 
-  (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     (cid:7013)  (cid:7409)  
(4) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) ,          ,  (cid:7277) (cid:7019)  , (cid:7079)(cid:7272) 45  (cid:7286)
(cid:6981)(cid:6979)    (cid:7407)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 67
(5)   (cid:7407)(cid:6989) , (cid:6981)  ,   (cid:7407) (cid:7286)      - (cid:7298)    
(6) (cid:7312)   (cid:7286),    (cid:6979)      
(7) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7367)      (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  - (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  
(cid:6979)      (cid:7074)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7300)          (cid:7079)  
(8)    (cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) (cid:6994)  (cid:7079)  ,  (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:7298) 
       (cid:6981)      (cid:6981)     (cid:7407) (cid:7286)      
(cid:7007)  (cid:7408)           (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7277)     (cid:7016) 
   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  -   (cid:7373)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  
  (cid:7286) (cid:7277)       (cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7277)     -      (cid:7021) 
     (cid:7289)   (cid:7298) ,(cid:7286) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7079)  
(9) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)        (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)  -  (cid:7367)  (cid:7278)   (cid:7409)  
(10) (cid:7278) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7286)       (cid:7409) (cid:7021)    (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)       
(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)  
83. (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   :- (1) (cid:6996)       (cid:7298)     (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)   (cid:6981) 
 (cid:7408) (cid:7008)        
(2) (cid:6996)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)     (cid:6981)(cid:7009)     
(3) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7286) , (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  ,     (cid:7004) (cid:7004)   (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7408) 
(cid:7079)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) , (cid:7079)(cid:7009)        (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) 
(4) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:6996)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7013)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)   (cid:6981) :-
(i)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)    ;
(ii)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)     (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  ;
(iii)    (cid:6981)    ;
(iv) (cid:7378) ,    (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)  ;
(v)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)        (cid:7021)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)  ;
(vi)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     ,  (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981) 
(cid:6981)      (cid:7018)  (cid:7272)       (cid:7011)        
(cid:7378)  (cid:7079)  ;
(vii) -  , (cid:7079)  (cid:7278)   (cid:7079)  ;
(viii) (cid:7061) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)  (cid:6981) ;
(ix)          (cid:7074)  (cid:7018)    ,   (cid:6981)(cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:7018)   ;
(x)    (cid:7298), (cid:7300), (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)    ;
(xi) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)     -   (cid:6981)(cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6981) ;
(xii) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059) ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(xiii) (cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7298)    (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     (cid:7407) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  
 ;
(xiv)    (cid:6981) (cid:7020)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)   (cid:6980) (cid:7018)  , (cid:6981), ,  ,
 (cid:6979),  (cid:6981)(cid:6981),  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981), (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408) (cid:7079)  ;
(xv)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)     (cid:6981) (cid:7020)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)   
   (cid:7353)(cid:7059)  (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:6981) ;
(xvi) (cid:7289)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)     -   (cid:7409)  ; 
(xvii)     (cid:7298)  (cid:7286) (cid:7408)   (cid:7061)  (cid:7373),   (cid:7016)   (cid:6981)      (cid:7008)
(cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:6981) 
(5) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)           (cid:6996)     (cid:7367) (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)
  (cid:7007)   (cid:7408)  
(6) (cid:6996)      (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)          (cid:7004) 
(cid:7298)    
84. (cid:6996) (cid:6979)  :- (1) (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7013)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) :
(i) (cid:6996)  (cid:7286)       (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008) (cid:7409)      (cid:7298)
 (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)  ;
(ii) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7312), (cid:7374)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)    ;
(iii)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)     (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7289)  (cid:7008) (cid:7286) (cid:7301) 
 (cid:6981)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7289) ;
(iv) (cid:7008)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7008)    (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7407)(cid:7300) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   
(cid:7277) (cid:7019)  , (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)      (cid:6981)    (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)
  ;
(v) -  , (cid:7079)  (cid:7278)     (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   ;
(vi)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)      (cid:7004)   (cid:7004) (cid:7004)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7407)(cid:7288) 
 (cid:7407)(cid:7286)  ;
(vii) (cid:6996)   (cid:7286)(cid:7076)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6996) (cid:7298)   (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6996)   (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  
- (cid:7008)   (cid:6981) (cid:7019)   ;
(viii)     (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7008)    (cid:6981)      (cid:7298)   (cid:6981) 
(cid:7008)   ;
(ix) (cid:7021)     (cid:7407) (cid:7407) -(cid:7021)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)      
     (cid:7378)  ;
(x) (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312),  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7298), (cid:6989)  (cid:7088)(cid:7298), (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:6989)
(cid:7312),   -, (cid:7079)(cid:7298), (cid:7278)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)      ;
(xi) (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), -(cid:6989)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), (cid:7021) (cid:7298), (cid:6989)  (cid:7378)(cid:7298), (cid:6979) (cid:7312), (cid:7079)(cid:6979) 
(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), (cid:7079)(cid:6981) ,     (cid:7312)   (cid:7272)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7298)   (cid:7312)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7312)     ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 69
(xii) (cid:6996)   (cid:7367) (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)         (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   
(cid:6979) (cid:7298),  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298) , (cid:7298)     ;
(xiii) (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7408) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  , (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7409)(cid:7298)
 (cid:6981) ,   - (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)  ;
(xiv)       (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7312)   (cid:7378) (cid:7021)  (cid:7298), (cid:6981) (cid:7298),
(cid:7021) (cid:7298), (cid:7298)   (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7272)   ;
(xv) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)(cid:7008)    (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   
 ;
(xvi)  (cid:6979)   (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  ;
(xvii) (cid:6996)    (cid:7079)   (cid:7378)(cid:7298)   (cid:7008)   ; 
(xviii)       (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7008)     (cid:7008)  (cid:6981) 
(3) (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7021) – (cid:6996)  (cid:7286)       (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008)   
   
85.   (cid:6979)  :- (1)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7013)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) :
(i) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7016)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7367)     (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7300)
  (cid:7367)  (cid:7306)  (cid:7407)(cid:7300)   ;
(ii) (cid:7298)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   ;
(iii) (cid:7008)        (cid:7016)       (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)   
(cid:7008)      (cid:7409)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:6981)  ;
(iv) (cid:6979) (cid:7021)     (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:6981) (cid:6979)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7061)  ;
(v)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7272) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)          (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)
   (cid:7008)     (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7378) (cid:7408)  ;
(vi)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)    (cid:7298)    ;
(vii)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   ;
(viii) (cid:7407) (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)   (cid:7016)    (cid:7407) (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
(cid:7021) (cid:7272)      -(cid:7020)     ;
(ix)       -  (cid:7298)  (cid:7300)   (cid:7011)      (cid:7021)  
(cid:7298)    (cid:7312)     (cid:7074)  ;
(x) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7079), -    (cid:7278)    -
(cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008)    ;
(xi) (cid:7298)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286) (cid:7409)      (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)   ;
(xii) - (cid:7008)  (cid:7019)    (cid:6996)     (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7409) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979) 
 (cid:6996)  (cid:7409) (cid:7008)    (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  ;
(xiii)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7407)   (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)   ;
(xiv)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7286)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)      (cid:7004)   (cid:7004) (cid:7004)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7407)(cid:7288) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
70 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 (cid:6981)   (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   ;
(xv)   (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7298)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)     (cid:6981)  ;
(xvi)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  ;
(xvii) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)         (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981)  
  (cid:6989)  (cid:7088)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)      (cid:7298)  -   (cid:7286)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7021)    
  ;
(xviii)  (cid:7021)      (cid:7021) (cid:7312),  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7298), (cid:6989)  (cid:7088)(cid:7298), (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:6989)
(cid:7312),   -, (cid:7278)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7408)        
(cid:7300)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298),    ,  (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7061)   ;
(xix)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), -(cid:6989)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), (cid:7021) (cid:7298), (cid:6989)  (cid:7378)(cid:7298), (cid:6979) (cid:7312), (cid:7079)(cid:6979) 
(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298), (cid:7079)(cid:6981) ,     (cid:7312)   (cid:7272)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7298)   (cid:7312)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7312)         (cid:7300)  (cid:7298) 
(cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7061)  ;
(xx)  (cid:7021)    (cid:6979)(cid:7298),  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298), ,  , (cid:6981), (cid:6980)(cid:7298)  :-
 (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312)  (cid:7008)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298), (cid:7008) (cid:7286) (cid:7407) (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)    ,
(cid:7312)         (cid:7300)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:6979) 
 (cid:7061)  ;
(xxi) (cid:7272)       (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)   
(cid:6981)(cid:7008)    (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)      ;
(xxii)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)     (cid:7021)    (cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) 
 ;
(xxiii) (cid:6996)   (cid:6979)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   ;
(xxiv) (cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7286),   (cid:7407)(cid:6989)      (cid:6981), (cid:6996)      ;
(xxv)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7300) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7008)     (cid:7374)(cid:7298)    ;
(xxvi) (cid:7298)  (cid:7300)   (cid:6981) (cid:7079)  ;
(xxvii)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)      (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)    (cid:6979)(cid:6981)
(cid:6981)(cid:7008)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7019)  (cid:6981)
(2)   (cid:6979)   (cid:7286)       (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7008)     
 
86.  (cid:7408)    :- (1) (cid:6996)   (cid:7298)      (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)     (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
   (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7407)  
(2) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:7019)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7021)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7409)      (cid:7408)
  (cid:7407)    (cid:7277)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7407) (cid:7277) (cid:7409)   ,    (cid:6979)   (cid:7409)
          (cid:7016)     (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7408)  
(3)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)
    (cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7408)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 71
(4) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)   (cid:7016)     (cid:7021)    (cid:7008)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)
   (cid:7286) (cid:7409)   
(5) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)          (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7278) (cid:7286) (cid:7277)  
(cid:7312)         (cid:7414)(cid:7298)    
(6)  (cid:7016)      (cid:7008)    (cid:7083)  (cid:7013)       (cid:7409) (cid:7407) 
 (cid:7004)  (cid:7013)    
(7)  (cid:7277)  (cid:7079)(cid:7019)          (cid:7289),  (cid:7079)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7083)     
(8)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:6981)
    (cid:7301)   (cid:7008)     , (cid:7008)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)
(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7079) (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7301)  
(9) (cid:7408)  (cid:6989)    (cid:6989)     (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7277)  (cid:7408)       
(cid:7016)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7298)   ,(cid:7289) (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)    (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7277)   
(10)  (cid:7408)     (cid:7013)  (cid:7409)   :
(i)   (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)  ,    (cid:7021) ,   , (cid:6981)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  
(cid:7021) (cid:7298)    (cid:6981) (cid:7011) (cid:7298),   (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)    (cid:6981) (cid:7011) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)     
   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) ; 
(ii)   (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7312)  (cid:6981) (cid:7011) (cid:7298) 
(11)  (cid:7408)     (cid:7016)       (cid:6981) (cid:7011)   (cid:7298),    (cid:7021) (cid:7312),
(cid:7298), (cid:7300)   (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7414) (cid:7408)  
(12)  (cid:7408)    (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7298)  (cid:7016)    (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) , (cid:6981) 
   (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  
(13)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)    (cid:7079)       (cid:7079)   (cid:7008) 

87.    (cid:7409)   :- (1) (cid:6996)   (cid:7074) (cid:7286)  (cid:7367)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    
    (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7298) (cid:6981) :
(i)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7008)   (cid:6990) (cid:7008)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6994)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7008)  ;
(ii)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286)   (cid:6981)(cid:7008)        (cid:7079)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)    
  ;
(iii)  - (cid:7079)(cid:7020)  - (cid:7298)  (cid:7059):     (cid:6979)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)     (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)
  (cid:7298) (cid:7408) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7277)   (cid:7298),   (cid:7079) ;
(iv) (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:7019) (cid:7378)(cid:7298), :  ,(cid:6981) (cid:6980), (cid:7021) (cid:7074),  , (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005) , (cid:6979), 
   (cid:7079)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7374)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)       (cid:6981)  ; 
(v) (cid:6996)    (cid:6979)    (cid:7079) 
(2)   (cid:6981)        (cid:7409)           (cid:7407) 
 
(3) (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)(cid:6989)   ,  (cid:7021)     (cid:6981)(cid:7008)       
     (cid:7407)(cid:6989)      (cid:7062)(cid:7062) (cid:6981)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(4)   (cid:7409)     (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7277)  
(5)    (cid:7021)     (cid:7409) (cid:7286)    (cid:7264)      (cid:7300)   
    (cid:7019)   
(6) (cid:7021)    (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)    (cid:7409) (cid:7008)   (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7004) (cid:7298)   
(7)    (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  - (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7367) -   (cid:6981)(cid:7407)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7074)
(cid:7004)    (cid:7408)  
(8)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7020)     (cid:7074) (cid:7021)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7408)
  (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)   (cid:6979)  
(9)       (cid:6996)   (cid:7409)    
88.   (cid:7300)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   :- (1) (cid:7021)    (cid:7367)        (cid:7407)(cid:6989)
     (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7272)  :
 (cid:7408)    (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7367) (cid:7004) (cid:7074)    (cid:7409) (cid:7004)     (cid:7407)(cid:6989)    
   (cid:7021)    (cid:7407)(cid:6989)     (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7004)  (cid:7272)  
(2) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)    (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)    , (cid:6996)      (cid:7021)    (cid:7007)  
(cid:7021)   (cid:7020) (cid:7069)  (cid:7074)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:6981)(cid:7008)     (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) (cid:6980) 
(cid:7007)    (cid:7074)  
(3) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7074) (cid:7409)  (cid:7019) (cid:7312)  
 (cid:7289),    (cid:6979) 
(4)   (cid:6991) , (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7012) (cid:7278)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)   
(cid:7012) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:7016)  
(5)   (cid:7367)  (cid:7021)  :
(i)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7277)  ,     (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)  
(cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7019)    (cid:7007)    (cid:7409)      ;
(ii) (cid:6981)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6979) (cid:7272)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7021)     ;
(iii)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7408)       ;
(iv) (cid:7408)   
(6)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)        (cid:7409)
(cid:7019)  ,   (cid:7286)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)      (cid:7016)  , (cid:6981) : :
(i) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272)    (cid:7008)    (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7020) 
(cid:7016) , (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)   (cid:7367)    (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)     ;
(ii) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263)   
 ; 
(iii)     -(cid:6981) 
(7)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:6989)   ,    , (cid:7016)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
  (cid:7298)     (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)    (cid:7407) (cid:6996)     

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 73
(8) (cid:7298)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)       (cid:7007) (cid:6979),   (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) 
 -    
(9)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)      (cid:7298)    , (cid:7408)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     
(10)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)           (cid:7021)   (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7286) 
(cid:7021)    (cid:7272)     (cid:6989)    (cid:6996)    (cid:7286)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7079)(cid:7004)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021)   
   (cid:7300)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7409) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7074)  (cid:7286)
 (cid:7367)  
(11)  (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7298)    ,     (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    (cid:6981)      (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298) (cid:7367)
(cid:6989)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)(cid:7407)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7277)     (cid:7008) (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7298)     (cid:7298)  
    (cid:7286) (cid:7408)    (cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:7298)    (cid:7409)        
      (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  
(12) (cid:7408) (cid:6981)    (cid:7286)   (cid:7407)(cid:6989)   ,   (cid:6979)   (cid:7407)(cid:6989)       (cid:6996)    
 
(13) (cid:6996)     (cid:6979)     (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7409)      (cid:7367) 
(cid:7408)  (cid:7298)      (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7298)   
(14) (cid:7408) (cid:6981)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373)   (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:6996)  , (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  
(cid:7298)  , (cid:7019)   ; (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)   (cid:6994)  (cid:7008)   (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  
(cid:7061) (cid:7409)  
(15) (cid:6996)     (cid:7409)            (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)  
(16) (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373)    (cid:6981)  ,         
(cid:6989)       
89. (cid:7298)   (cid:7011)     (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979):- (1) (cid:6996)       (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)  
(cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7414)(cid:7298)    (cid:7004) (cid:7004) (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981) (cid:6979)(cid:7312)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7263) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
  
(2) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7286) (cid:7013)  (cid:7013)  :
(i)       (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  ;
(ii)  (cid:7016) ,  , (cid:6979)    (cid:7008)  ;
(iii)  (cid:7278) (cid:7408)  (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) ;
(iv) (cid:7019) (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7353)(cid:7059)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059), (cid:7079)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7373)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  ; 
(v) (cid:7013) , (cid:7020)   (cid:6981) 
(3) (cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7013)  (cid:7088)(cid:7298)     (cid:7076) (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:6981):-
(cid:7059).. (cid:7414)
1.  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7300)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)
2. (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7021) 
3.  (cid:7016)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) 
4.  (cid:7016)      (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7008)   
5. (cid:6996)   (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7079) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
74 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:6981)(cid:7059) 
6. (cid:6996)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)
7.   (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  --(cid:7407)(cid:6979)     (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979)

8.   (cid:6979) (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)   (cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:6981)
9.    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:7079)  ((cid:6989)  (cid:7088)(cid:7298) )
(4) (cid:6996)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7414)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312),  (cid:7016)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298),  (cid:6981)(cid:7298), (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7298),  (cid:6981)(cid:7312),    (cid:7312)   (cid:7312)   (cid:7312),   (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6979) (cid:7414)(cid:7298)  (cid:7008)
(cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298), (cid:7061) (cid:6989)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312),  (cid:7353)(cid:7059)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298), (cid:7263) (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298),  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)
(cid:7298)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312),  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7298)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7407)(cid:7298),     
(cid:7021) (cid:7312)      (cid:7298)  (cid:6990)  (cid:6981)(cid:7312)(cid:6981) ,  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298), (cid:6980)(cid:7298), (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7298),
   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312),    (cid:6989) (cid:7312),       (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)
(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079) 
(5) (cid:6996)  , (cid:6996)    (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)   ,  (cid:7019)   (cid:7408)
(cid:6996)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7357)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7008)    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)
(cid:7272)     (cid:7020) (cid:7069)      (cid:7021)   (cid:6979) (cid:6980)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)  
(cid:7408)  
(6) (cid:6996) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7008)   (cid:6990)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:6980),  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)    
  (cid:7019)  , (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7357)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7008)  
   (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)     
(7) (cid:6996) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7020) (cid:7069)    (cid:6981)     (cid:7016)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) 
 (cid:6980),  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)      (cid:7019)  , (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  ,  (cid:6979)
 (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7357)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7008)       (cid:6996)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  
  
(8) (cid:6996)    (cid:7079)    (cid:6989) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) 
 
(9) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)  (cid:6979) (cid:6980)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979) (cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)
  
(10) (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7079) (cid:6980) (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7298)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7298) 
(cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)   (cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7357)  (cid:7008)       (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)     
90.     :- (1) (cid:7408)           (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7277) 
 
(2) - (1) (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)      (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)    , (cid:7378)  
       (cid:7277)  (cid:7289)
(3)   (cid:7016) (cid:7016)           (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)   ,   
(cid:7409)    (cid:6979), ,    (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)     , (cid:7008)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7286)
(cid:7020)  (cid:7409)       (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 75
91. (cid:7020)(cid:7069)   (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7367)  :- (1)   (cid:6979)
 , 2005 (2006  4)  (cid:6981) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  , (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7020)(cid:7069)  
 (cid:6996)  (cid:7298) (cid:7408) (cid:7013)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7408)  (cid:6981) :
(i)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:6979) ;
(ii) (cid:7298)  (cid:7286)   , (cid:6979)  (cid:7079) () (cid:7061)   ;
(iii) (cid:7298)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)   ;
(iv) (cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7312)  (cid:7271) ,   (cid:7018) , (cid:7298)   (cid:7271)   
  (cid:7298)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7410)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    (cid:7286)
(cid:7272)  ;
(v) (cid:7008)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)  
(cid:7021) (cid:7312)   (cid:7298)    (cid:6981)(cid:7312)  ;
(vi)    (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)    (cid:6981)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)  
  (cid:7061)       (cid:7407)  (cid:7011)   ;
(vii) (cid:6996)  (cid:6979) , (cid:7020) (cid:7069)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7357)
  
92.     (cid:7286)  :- (1)         (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  -, 
  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7021)     (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7301)  ,   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  
   (cid:7298),  (cid:7277)        (cid:7277)     (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7016)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408)
 ,     (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)   
(2)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7286)   ,  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   ,  (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)  
(3)   (cid:7016)            (cid:7004) (cid:7407) (cid:6981)    (cid:7408)
   (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7061)  
(4)  (cid:7013)   :
(i)     (cid:7061) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  ,  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  , (cid:7020) (cid:7069) 
(cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7011) / (cid:7408)   (cid:7079)  ;
(ii) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272)  ;
(iii)  (cid:7272)    ‘ (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:7074)’    (cid:7004)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989) ,     (cid:7018) (cid:6989)
, (cid:7020) (cid:7069)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7011) , (cid:6996)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7011) , (cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7008)  (cid:7011)   (cid:7008)   (cid:7021) (cid:7312) 
 ;
(iv) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)         -      (cid:6981)
 (cid:7013) (cid:7298)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) / (cid:7367) (cid:7278)   (cid:7079)   ;
(v)      (cid:7407) (cid:7011)    (cid:6981)(cid:7009)  (cid:6990)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7312)  (cid:7079)  
     ;
(vi)      (cid:7011)   () (cid:7079)  (cid:7074)(cid:7298) () / (cid:6989) (cid:7069)  () (cid:7021)  
 (cid:6981)    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:7407)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)-(cid:7079)    (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  
  (cid:7008),    , (cid:7367) (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
76 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(vii)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7312)     (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021)   -
  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)-(cid:7079)     (cid:7298) (cid:7286)     (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7298), (cid:6979)(cid:7009)   
(cid:6981)   (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)    ;
(viii)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)(cid:7076)(cid:7298) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298),  (cid:7021) (cid:7003) (cid:7298),  (cid:7355)(cid:7298), (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)
  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7312)   ;
(ix) (cid:7271)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298), (cid:7410) (cid:7298), (cid:7300),  (cid:7300), (cid:7013)  (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298) 
      - - ,(cid:7289) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)       ;
(x)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) ,      (cid:7409)   , -  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)    (cid:7300)   (cid:7021) (cid:7003) (cid:7298),
 (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7018)  (cid:7410)(cid:7312)    (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:6989)  (cid:7416)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7418)  (cid:7021) 
 ;
(xi) (cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:7298), (cid:7079)(cid:6989)  (cid:7298), (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7298), (cid:7016)  (cid:7312),  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7263)
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)(cid:7312),  ,  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)    ;
(xii)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7011)   (cid:6996) (cid:7298)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7011) (cid:7298)  (cid:7278)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298) 
 (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7286)     (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7407)(cid:7298)    (cid:7298)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)
(cid:7278) (cid:6981) (cid:7019)  (cid:7409)   
(5)      (cid:7409)     (cid:7277)   ,   (cid:7008)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7018) 
   (cid:7021) (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7263) (cid:7079)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7286)
(cid:7407)(cid:6981)  
(6)        :
(i)  (cid:6989)     (cid:6981)     (cid:7008) ,    ,  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  ;
(ii)     (cid:7079)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)      (cid:7407)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)
 ; 
(iii)    (cid:7408) (cid:6989)        (cid:7408) (cid:7008)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7263)    (cid:7408) 
  (cid:7006) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  
(7) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)   (cid:6996)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)     (cid:7409)    (cid:6989)   (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
   
93.   (cid:7298)  -  :-  /(cid:7021) ,   (cid:7408),      
  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298)    (cid:7286)   , (cid:6996)        /(cid:7021) ,
  (cid:7408)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6981)   -   (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7008)    (cid:7004) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  
(cid:7016)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   
94.  :- ... 679 ()  26 (cid:6989) , 2007  (cid:7367)   ... 903 ()  26
(cid:7408)(cid:7013) , 2011  (cid:7367)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:6979)) , 2007   (cid:7367) (cid:7021) (cid:7408) 
 :
  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:6981) 2007  (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7408) 
 ,    (cid:7298)  (cid:7298)   (cid:7277) (cid:7289),  (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 77
(cid:7079)(cid:7272)-I
[ 8 (1), 8(5)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7409)/.. (cid:6990)  __________________________________
   _______________________________
 (cid:7021)  __________________________________
   __________________________________
(cid:7008)     __________________________________
.(cid:7011) (cid:7016) ...  __________________________________
1.  __________________________________
2. //(cid:6979)   __________________________________
3. /(cid:7008)  (cid:7409)  __________________________________
4. ____________________________________________________________________________
5. (cid:6981)
() (cid:7008)  (///)
() (cid:7021) // (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
6. (cid:7408)   :
(i)  (cid:7286) (cid:6979)
(ii)  (cid:7286) (cid:6979)
(iii) (cid:7407) (cid:7272)  
(iv)  (cid:7272)  :(cid:6989) 
(v) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
7. (cid:7407)  (cid:7011) 
(cid:7059).     (cid:7410) (cid:6979) (cid:7018)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021)(cid:7005)   (cid:7018) 
  (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:6991)  ((cid:7408)
.
(cid:7021)  
 (cid:7298))

((cid:7408)
 )
8.     __________________________________
9. (cid:6989)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7009)    (cid:6981)(cid:7004)  , (cid:7408)   /(cid:7277)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
10.  (cid:7409) (cid:7286)
 
(i) (cid:7077) (i) ../(cid:7408)(cid:7016) (cid:7286)  
(ii)     (ii)  /  
(iii) (cid:7298)   (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286) (iii) (cid:7021) (cid:7286) 
(iv)   (iv) (cid:7071)/(cid:7286)(cid:7411)/(cid:7410)(cid:6989) /
(v)   (v)  (cid:7008) 
(vi)  (cid:7008) 
11.   (cid:7011) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) __________________________________
12.   :
(i) (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)      (cid:7407)    (cid:7277)
 (cid:7277)
(ii) (cid:7021)  (cid:7367) (cid:7013)     (cid:7409)  :
() :  (cid:7061) /(cid:7277)
() :    /(cid:7277)
() :    /(cid:7277)
() : (cid:7298)   /(cid:7277)
(.) : (cid:7083)   /(cid:7277)
() :  /(cid:7277)
13.  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7011)  :
(i) (cid:6979)
(ii) (cid:7277) (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
(iii) (cid:7277) (cid:6979)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7408) (cid:6979)   
(iv) (cid:6979)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7408) (cid:6979)   
(v) (cid:6979)     (cid:7409)
14. (cid:7021)     :
(i)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286)   ,  (cid:7263)
(ii) (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7272)  
(iii) (cid:7007) (cid:7298)  (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:7018) 
(iv) (cid:6979) –   (cid:7079)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 79
(v) (cid:6981)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  
(vi) - (cid:7409)  (cid:7004) 
(vii) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7004) 
(viii) (cid:7021)    
(ix) (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)    
(x)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7021)   
(xi) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)
(xii) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) 
(xiii) (cid:7407) 
(xiv) (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
(xv) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
15.  (cid:7021)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7011)  :
(i) /-/
(ii) /..(cid:7016)  (cid:7021) / (cid:6981) (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) 
(iii) (cid:7079) (cid:7079)
(iv) . . . .  (cid:7008)(cid:6981) (cid:7378)
16. (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979), (cid:7408)   __________________________________
17.  (cid:7074) :
(i) (cid:6979)
(ii) (cid:6979)
(iii)   (cid:6981) 
(iv)  (cid:7286) 
(v)  (cid:7286) 
(vi)   (cid:7410)  (cid:7289)
(vii) (cid:7008)  (cid:7410)   (cid:7289)
(viii) (cid:7286)
(ix)  (cid:7020)    (cid:7289)
18. (cid:6989)   (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)  (cid:7007)    :- /(cid:7277)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
80 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7059).. (cid:7018)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7012)  (cid:6989)
1.  (cid:7018) (cid:6981) - -/ -/(cid:6989) /(cid:7008) 
( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
2. (cid:7407) (cid:7018) (cid:6981) ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
3. (cid:7289) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)/-//-/(cid:6989) /(cid:7008) (
(cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
4. (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
19. (cid:6989)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)      /(cid:7277)
20. (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7367)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7367)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7061) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)       
(cid:7298)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)    ?
/(cid:7277)
21. - (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7083) (cid:7061)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)      :
____________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________
22.  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)     _______________________________
____________________________________________________________________
23.   (cid:7079)(cid:7009) (cid:7263)   (cid:7011)  ___________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
24.  (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  _______________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
25.  (cid:7016)      ______________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
 (cid:7016)   
(cid:7367) (cid:7021) (cid:6979)(cid:7407)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 81
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) – 2
[ 8 (7)]
 -  (cid:6979)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409) (cid:7373)       (cid:7407) (cid:6979)   
(cid:7289)______________()  . __________/__________________________(cid:6996) _________
,    (cid:7264)  (cid:7408) (cid:7289) ________________ (  )  ____  (cid:7004) (cid:7004)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7013)    (cid:7300)  (cid:7007)     (cid:7264) :-
1. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409), , (cid:7079)     (cid:7079) (cid:7373)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7289)
2. (cid:7408) (cid:7289)   (cid:6979) , (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7373)   (cid:7264) 
3. (cid:7408)      (cid:6979) (cid:7286)    (cid:7016)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:7299)(cid:7004)  (cid:7272)   -
   (cid:6989)   (cid:7272)
4. (cid:7408) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286),  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  
5. (cid:7408) (cid:7289)  (cid:7019)   (cid:7409)   (cid:7272) (cid:7408)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)/(cid:6979)/  (cid:7007)  (cid:7277)  
6. (cid:7408) (cid:7408)      (cid:6981)(cid:6979)    (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7272)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7272) 
7. (cid:7408) (cid:7408)     (cid:7074)       (cid:7289) (cid:6981)  (cid:7004)   (cid:7272) 
...............20 ... ,..............(cid:7408)
(cid:7373) (cid:7020) (cid:7408)
  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
( (cid:6979) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) )
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
82 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272)-3
[-10 (1) (iii)]
(cid:6981)(cid:6979)  
    (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  : 20......... (cid:7409) (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). /.. (cid:6990) ....................... (cid:7409)    
  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) / (cid:7021) /(cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)    
(cid:7408) _________________ (  )      (cid:7408)    
(cid:6989) ________________(cid:7367)   (cid:7020)  __________________ ()__________________ () (cid:7409)
   (cid:6981)     (cid:6981) (cid:7020)   (cid:7408) (cid:6989)     (cid:7018)     (cid:7407)  (cid:7263) (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  
   (cid:6981)    
:   (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:6989)   ______________ (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:6979) 
_____________(cid:7013)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7007)  ________(cid:7409)      :-
1. (cid:7408) ________(cid:7409)   ________      (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7408)  
2. (cid:7408)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    ________  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)   (cid:7277)    (cid:6980) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  
3. (cid:7408)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)    (cid:7277)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7298) 
4. (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)     ,   (cid:7409) (cid:6989)   , (cid:6979)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   
5. (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)           (cid:7408)  
  (cid:7277)     (cid:7286) (cid:7408)       
6. (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)   :(cid:7079) (cid:6981)  (cid:7008)  -(cid:7076)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989) 
   (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)  ,  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7004)    (cid:7286) (cid:6981)    
 .........................20 ________
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
(cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)/(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7407)(cid:7009)  : (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7288), (cid:7408)  (cid:7298),  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367) :(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 83
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) – 4
     (cid:7408)      (cid:7021) (cid:7286)   
 (cid:7286),
(cid:7079) 
________
________
________
.......20________ (cid:7408) ( ), (cid:7074)/(cid:7074) ___________________________ ________ ,
 (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). / ... ......  (cid:7021)  ..... . (cid:7286) (cid:7009)     (cid:7408)  ,  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367) 
(cid:7408)    (cid:7408)   ___________(cid:7409)    ________    (cid:7021) ((cid:6981)(cid:6979) /(cid:6979)  (cid:7021) )  (cid:7286)
  
  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)       (cid:6979) (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)  (cid:6989)     (cid:7004) (cid:7004) (cid:7286) (cid:7286) 
     (cid:7021) ((cid:6981)(cid:6979) /(cid:6979)  (cid:7021) )        (cid:6989)    (cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7008)  (cid:7408)  
     (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  
 (cid:7409)   ________
 (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)
: (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)/(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) – 5
[ 10(2)]
  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   
(cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6990)  ________
   ________
 (cid:7021)  ________
 (cid:7286),

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
84 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7407)(cid:6979) /(cid:7021) (cid:6994)   -   (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  
_____________ (  ) (cid:7074)/(cid:7074)________________ ________  ________  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)
(cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7408)   
 (cid:7375) (cid:7287) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:6989)   (cid:7367)     (cid:6981)(cid:7004) , (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7020) 
 (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)    - (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ________  ________  (cid:6981),  (cid:6981) (cid:7367)
 (cid:7408)     (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
   (cid:7287) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) -(cid:6980),    (cid:7278)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7408) (cid:6980) ,
(cid:7408) (cid:7019)  , (cid:6981)  (cid:7286)     (cid:7407)(cid:6981)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)
 : (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)/(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) – 6
[ 10 (9), 11(2), 64(1), 64(3)(i)]
  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
  (cid:7016)    (cid:6994) (cid:7298)  
(cid:7059) (cid:6990) ________
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981), ____________________________________()  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
(cid:7407)(cid:6979) /(cid:7021) (cid:6994) /- _______ _ ((cid:7018) (cid:6989)   )
(cid:7079)(cid:7409) (cid:6990)  ________
  (cid:6981) ________
 (cid:7021)  ________
  (cid:7409) (cid:7079):   (cid:7008)
1.  ________
2. //(cid:7008)   (cid:6981) ________
3. (cid:7410) ________
4.  ________
5. (cid:6981) ________
6.    __________________
7.    _________________
8. (cid:6979)   _________________
9. (cid:7021)   ________________________________________________
10.   (cid:7289)(cid:6981) ________

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 85
11.     ________________________________________________
12. //(cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7013) (cid:6981) (cid:6990)  ________________________
13. (cid:6989)    :-
(i) (cid:7088) (cid:6979)
(ii)  (cid:6979)
(iii) (cid:7407) :(cid:6989) 
(iv)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6979)
(v) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
14. (cid:7407)  (cid:7011) 
(cid:7059).    (cid:7410) (cid:6979) (cid:7018)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   (cid:7018)  ((cid:7408)
.  (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:6991)    )
(cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:7004) 
((cid:7408) 
)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
15 (cid:6989)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   , -(cid:7004) /(cid:6994) (cid:7298)  ,   (cid:7011)  –
__________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________
16 (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) 
i)    ______________(cid:7074)/(cid:6981)-(cid:7074)/(cid:6981) (cid:7277)
ii)   __________________ (cid:7074)/(cid:6981)-(cid:7074)/(cid:6981) (cid:7277)
iii)   __________________ (cid:7074)/(cid:6981)-(cid:7074)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
iv)    - __________________ (cid:7074)(cid:6981)/-(cid:7074)/(cid:6981) (cid:7277)
v)    - __________________ (cid:7074)/(cid:6981)-(cid:7074)/(cid:6981) (cid:7277)
vi)    - __________________ (cid:7074)(cid:6981)/-(cid:7074)/(cid:6981) (cid:7277)
vii)   - (/) __________________ (cid:7074)/(cid:6981)-(cid:7074)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
17 (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7408)   :
(cid:7059)..   (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7010)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)  (cid:7003)
(cid:7079)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) 
(cid:7021)   

 

 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]


(cid:7008) 
(i) /
(ii)///

18   (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7004) __________________
19 (cid:6981) -(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  __________________
20 (cid:7004)   (cid:7008)  , (cid:7408)   __________________
21 (i)  (cid:7409) (cid:7286) (    (cid:7286))
 
) (cid:7077) () ../(cid:7408)(cid:7016) (cid:7286)  
)    () /  
) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) ((cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286)) () (cid:7021) (cid:7286) 
)   () (cid:7414) (cid:6981)
)   () (cid:7071)(cid:7306) /(cid:7286)(cid:7411)/(cid:7410)(cid:6989) /
) (cid:7008)  () (cid:7008) 
(ii) (cid:7353)(cid:7004)  (cid:7272) __________________
(iii) (cid:7004) (cid:7020)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7004)   __________________
22  (cid:7286)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) __________________
23     (cid:7011)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)__________________
24   (cid:7011)   -     __________________
25 (cid:6981)- ((cid:7018)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298)    ,   (cid:6989)   (cid:7079) (cid:7004) ) __________________
26  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7011)  __________________
i) (cid:6979)
ii) (cid:6979) V  (cid:7007) 
iii) (cid:6979) V   (cid:7016)  (cid:6979) V II   (cid:7007)  (cid:7408)
iv) (cid:6979) V II   (cid:7016)  (cid:6979) X   (cid:7007)  (cid:7408)
v) (cid:6979) X   (cid:7007)  (cid:7408)
27   (cid:7079) (cid:6979)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  () :
28  (cid:7079) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  () :
29 (cid:7021)     (/(cid:7277) (cid:7286)    )

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 87
(i)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7007)    ,  (cid:7263)
(ii) (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7272)  
(iii) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:7272)
(iv) (cid:6979) –   
(v)   (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  
(vi) - (cid:7409)  (cid:7004) 
(vii) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  
(viii) (cid:7021)    
(ix) (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)    
(x)  (cid:7286)   (cid:6989)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7277) 
(xi) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)
(xii) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) 
(xiii) (cid:7407) 
(xiv) (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
(xv) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
30  (cid:7021) ,  (cid:7007)  (cid:7408),  (cid:7011) 
i) /-/
ii) /.. (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) /.(cid:6981) (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) 
iii) (cid:7079) (cid:7079)
iv ) . . . .  (cid:7008)(cid:6981) (cid:7378)
31 (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979), (cid:7408)  ________________________
32  (cid:7074) :-
(i) (cid:6979)
(ii) (cid:6979)
(iii)   (cid:6981) 
(iv)  (cid:7286) 
(v)  (cid:7286) 
(vi)   (cid:7410)   (cid:7289)
(vii) (cid:7008)  (cid:7410)   (cid:7289)
(viii) (cid:7390)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ix)  (cid:7020)   (cid:7289)
33  (cid:7409) (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7004)  __________________
34   (cid:7079) (cid:7074)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  __________________
35   (cid:7079) (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) __________________
36    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (    (cid:7079)     )
37 (cid:6989)   (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)  (cid:7007)    : /(cid:7277)
(cid:7059).. (cid:7018) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7012) (cid:6989) 
1  (cid:7018) (cid:6981)/-/--/ (cid:6989) / (cid:7008) 
( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
2 (cid:7407) (cid:7018) (cid:6981) ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
3 (cid:7289) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)/-/--/(cid:6989) / (cid:7008) 
( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
4 (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
38 (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)      /(cid:7277)
39 (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7367)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7367) 
(cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7367) (cid:7408)      (cid:7021)  
   (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)    /(cid:7277)
40 (cid:6989)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     (cid:7409) , (cid:7408)  , /(cid:7277)
41  (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7010) (cid:7408)  
42  (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)  
43    
(i) - (cid:7409) (cid:6979)
(ii) -   (cid:6979)
(iii) -   (cid:7018) 
(iv) -  (cid:7079) ((cid:7004) )
(v)  (cid:7083)   (cid:7079)
(vi)  (cid:7286) ((cid:7021) /(cid:7408) )
(vii) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
44 (cid:6989)      (cid:7408)    (cid:7010) (cid:7408)  , (cid:7408)      (cid:7021) (cid:7286)   (cid:7011)   (cid:7286)
_____________________________________________________________/(cid:7277)
45  (cid:7021)  /  (cid:6981)(cid:7004)   (cid:6989)    , (cid:7408)   
46   (cid:7407) (cid:7272):
47   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  ((cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) , (cid:7408)  ) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 89
48  (cid:7409)  (cid:7021)  :
49 (cid:7008)   (cid:7407)(cid:7009) 
  (cid:7407)
1. (cid:7004)   __________________
2. (cid:7407) (cid:7021)  __________________
3. (cid:7373) __________________
4.   (cid:7414)  __________________
5. (cid:7021) (cid:7312)     __________________
6.   (cid:7298)/(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7019)  __________________
7. (cid:6981) (cid:7408)  (cid:6980)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  __________________
8. (cid:7407)(cid:6979) /-(cid:7016)  /  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)
____________________________________________________________________________
(cid:7407)(cid:6979) /  /
 (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
  
 (cid:7011) 
(cid:7079)(cid:7272)- 7
[ 11(3), 13(7)(vi), 13(8)(ii), 19(4), 19(17), 62(6)(vii), 62(6)(x), 69 I (3)]
 (cid:6989)     (...)
  (cid:7016)    /    (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)    
(     (cid:7286))
 (cid:6981)/(cid:6981) (cid:7016)  /(cid:7407)(cid:6979)   …………………….........................
...    (cid:7409) …………………………………………………………………
20………………… /(cid:7079) (cid:6990) ...........................
(cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:6990)
  (cid:6981) (  (cid:7079)),   (cid:7016)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)
……………………………………………
 (cid:7021) ………………………………………………………………………………….
(cid:6981)    ……………………………………………………
(cid:7278) (cid:6990)  ((cid:7408)   (cid:7286) )………………………………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7278) (cid:7409)  ((cid:7408) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) ) ……………………………………………
  (cid:7079) (  , (cid:7286))
I. (cid:7016)   (6  )
II. (cid:7007)   (6    (cid:6981))
III. (cid:6981) (1 (cid:6981)  )
. (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7011)  ((cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7278)  /-/(cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7011)   )
1.    …………………………………
2. /(cid:7008)  (cid:7409) …………………………
3. (cid:7410): /……………………
4.    :……………………………………..
5.    : ……………………………………
6. (cid:7020) (cid:7069)…………………………………….
7. (cid:6981)……………………………………….
8. …………………………………………
9.    …………………………..
10. (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) …………………………………………………………………..
11.      (cid:7011) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) …………………………………..
12.  (cid:7409)     (cid:7011) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)………………………………
13.  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)/(cid:7298)  (cid:7011) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)…………………………
14.  (cid:6981)(cid:7004) ,   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)       (cid:7407)    (cid:7013)  (cid:7410)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)(cid:7298) 
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:7011)  :(cid:7286)
(cid:7059).. (cid:7088) (cid:7410)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)
1.    (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
2. (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)    (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
3. (cid:7004)   (cid:6980)  (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
4. (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
5. , (cid:7004)   
6. (cid:6989)   -(cid:6989)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 91
7. (cid:7414) (cid:7019) 
 (cid:7079)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981), (cid:6979)  
8.   (cid:7021)     (cid:6979)  
--(cid:7079)(cid:6979)
9. (cid:7021) (cid:7074)  
(cid:7008)    (cid:7004)(cid:6981)    
(cid:7018) ,  (cid:7410), -(cid:6979), (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
10.   (cid:7408)     
(cid:7079)   ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286)) 
.  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ( 3    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7004) (cid:7019)    (cid:7286)    (cid:7409) )
[(cid:7407)(cid:7009) : (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7008) -(cid:7008)    (cid:7079) (cid:7286)]
1. (cid:7407)(cid:6979) / (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7016)    ………………….......................................
2. (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) ………………………………………………………………………
3. (cid:7278) (cid:6990) ……………………………………………………………………………..
4. (cid:6981)  …………………………………………………………………….
5. (cid:7079) (cid:6990) …………………………………………….
6.   …………………………………..
7.    (cid:7409)  ( (cid:7079)(cid:6996)  , )
I. (cid:7016)  (6  )
II. (cid:7007)   (6    (cid:6981))
III. (cid:6981) (1 (cid:6981)  )
8. (cid:6979)(cid:7004)   (cid:7021)  …………………….. …………………….
9. (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)         (cid:7079)
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
10.  (cid:7079)(cid:7272)  -  (cid:7410) 14 (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) 
(cid:7059).. (cid:7088)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)
1.    (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
2. (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)    (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
3. (cid:7004)   (cid:6980)  (cid:7272)(cid:7286)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
4. (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
5. , (cid:7004)   
6. (cid:6989)   -(cid:6989)  
7. (cid:7414) (cid:7019) 
8. (cid:7021)      (cid:7079)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981),
(cid:6979)    (cid:6979)  
--(cid:7079)(cid:6979)
9. (cid:7021) (cid:7074)  
10. (cid:7008)    (cid:7004)(cid:6981)   
   (cid:7079)  ,    ,
 (cid:7410), -(cid:6979), (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  
(cid:7408) ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286)) 
11.   (cid:6981)   (cid:7008)   (cid:6979)  (cid:6981) 
I. -(cid:7074) (cid:7409) (cid:7300) (cid:7286) 
II.   (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
III. (cid:7008)  , (cid:7408)   
12. (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7409)  ………………………………………  (cid:7409)  
(cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7407), (cid:7407)(cid:7009)    ……………………………….
-  (cid:6979)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)      (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7009)       
…………………………………………….......................................................................
(cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) …………………(cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:7021) (cid:6979)…………………..
. (cid:6989)(cid:6981)     (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:6981) ((cid:6989)(cid:6981)    15 (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7409) )
1. (cid:7021) (cid:7008)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7011)   (cid:7021) (cid:7008) (cid:7407)   (cid:6989)(cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)
2. (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7312)/(cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7011) 
3.   (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  (cid:7414) 
4.  (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ( (cid:6991)  (cid:7409) ,  -  (cid:7286))
5.  (cid:7409) (cid:6981)   (cid:7021) (cid:7409)  ( (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:7300)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) )
(cid:7059).. (cid:7088)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) 
1.    (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) 
2. (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)    (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
3. (cid:7004)   (cid:6980)  (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
4. (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7272)(cid:7286)
5. , (cid:7004)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 93
6. (cid:6989)   -(cid:6989)  
7. (cid:7414) (cid:7019) 
8.  (cid:7079)  (cid:7018)  (cid:6981), (cid:6979)   
(cid:7021)     (cid:6979)   --
(cid:7079)(cid:6979)
9. (cid:7021) (cid:7074)  
10. (cid:7008)  
6. (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  /(cid:7021) (cid:7008) /(cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) …………………………………………………….
7. (cid:6979) (cid:7409) , (cid:7408) (cid:6979) ……………………………………………………….
8. (cid:6979) (cid:7409)   (cid:7079) –  (cid:7408)  (cid:6980)(cid:7009) ,  (cid:6981) (cid:7408)………….............................
9.  /(cid:7079)(cid:6996)    (cid:6981)  …...................................
10. (cid:7407)-(cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981)   (cid:7407)(cid:6979) /-   (cid:7011) -
……………………………………………………………………...........................................................................
11. (cid:7407)-(cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981)     -     (cid:6980) ( (cid:7079) )
………………………………………………..
12. (cid:7079)(cid:6996)  /(cid:6989)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7011) , (cid:7408)  ………………………….......................................
13. (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    (cid:7020)  (cid:7079)    (cid:6980) ( (cid:7079)
)………………………………………………………………….
14. (cid:6981)(cid:6989)   (cid:6981) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ……………………………………………
15. (cid:7008)   …………………………………………………………………
.  (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:6989) (cid:7019) / (cid:7021) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
1. (cid:7289)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  : / (cid:7407)
2.  (cid:7409)   - :     -/(cid:6979)  (cid:7301) 
-/(cid:6979)– /(cid:7277)
3. (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)-(cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981)     (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)/-  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ………………… …………………………………………………
4. (cid:6981)  :(cid:7021)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)……………...................................................
5.   (cid:7079) (cid:7407)  (cid:7018) /(cid:7004) …………………………………………….
6.    ,  (cid:7272)  (cid:7298)/  (cid:7272)…………….......................................
7.  (cid:7414)    (cid:7408) (cid:7079)   ………………………………………………..
8. (cid:6989)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7408) (cid:7018)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)  ? (cid:7021) /(cid:7021) /(cid:7008)  (cid:7408)      (cid:7286)
..................................................................................................................../(cid:7277)
9. (cid:7059):                 (cid:7278) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
.................................................................................................................................................

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
10.  (cid:6990)    (cid:7079) (cid:7079)/  (cid:7286) (cid:7409) / ………….......................................
11.  (cid:7074)  (cid:7079)
[ :  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7286)]
 (cid:7074) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)  (      
   )
 (cid:7277) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7008)  (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
(cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
 (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
... (cid:6981)
  (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
(cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:6981)
 (cid:6981)
 (cid:6981)
  (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263)
(cid:7407)(cid:6979) / (cid:7016)  /  (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
     (cid:7011) 
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 8
[ 11(6)]
-/ (cid:6979)/(cid:6991) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7409)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)          
(cid:7367) (cid:7020) (cid:7408) (cid:7409)   (cid:7373)/ (cid:7074)
(cid:7408), (cid:7289) …………………….-, (cid:6979), (cid:7407)(cid:7019) , (cid:6991)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7409)  
(cid:7286)………………………..( )  (cid:7408)-(cid:7008)  (cid:6981) ………………………… (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)    
(cid:7408)  ,  (cid:6989)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7271)………../- ((cid:7271)……………………………………) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)    
    (cid:7373)/-(cid:7074) (cid:7020) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)  , (cid:7289) (cid:7367) (cid:6989)  …………………...... (cid:6994) 
(cid:7018)   (cid:7272) (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7004)   (cid:7264)   …………………  (cid:7079) …………………………... (cid:7300)
(cid:7409)    (cid:7013)  (cid:7300)      (cid:7007)   (cid:7264) 
1. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)   (cid:7007)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:7408)     (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)
(cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7277) (cid:7272);
2. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7409) (cid:7312)  (cid:6989)  
(cid:7277) ;
3. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:6989)    (cid:7079)(cid:7408) (cid:7021) / (cid:7018)  (cid:7286)   (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7408) (cid:7408)   (cid:7289)   (cid:7408) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7074)   (cid:7298),      ;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 95
4. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409)   (cid:6989)      (cid:7020) (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7272);
5. (cid:7408) (cid:7289)    (cid:6981)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7263), (cid:6981)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7272)       (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) 
   (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7272);
6. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:6989)      (cid:7286) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7272), (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7277) / 
  (cid:7018)   (cid:7074)     ;
7. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7408)  (cid:7074)/(cid:7004) (cid:7004)        (cid:7289) (cid:6981)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7272);
8. (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7272) (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)    (cid:7286);
   (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286), (cid:7289)     (cid:7264)  (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979) (cid:7021)      ………………..(cid:7271) 
((cid:7271)…………………………….) (cid:7021)      (cid:7007)   
20 ……………….. (cid:7408) ……………………………..
(cid:7373)/ (cid:7074) (cid:7020) (cid:7408)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
( (cid:6979) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) )
(cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069) / (cid:7021) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)   (cid:6981)
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7407)(cid:6989)  (cid:7288), (cid:7408)  (cid:7298), (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)(cid:6989)  (cid:7272)  (cid:7059) (cid:6990)       ;
( (cid:7298)   -(cid:7074) (cid:7020) (cid:7408) (cid:7408) ,   (cid:7408) )
(cid:7289)/ ………………………….. ………………………( (cid:7298)     (cid:7021) ) (cid:7367) (cid:6989) ............. 
 ((cid:7373)/-(cid:7074) (cid:7020) (cid:7408)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   ) /(cid:7298)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)     (cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:7289)/ 
(cid:7373)/-(cid:7074) (cid:7409)   (cid:7300)   (cid:7272)/(cid:7286)  (cid:7408)...........( (cid:7020)(cid:7408)    ) (cid:7367)  
 (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7289)/ (cid:7021) / (cid:7021)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7272)  (cid:7367) …………………... (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
20………….. (cid:7408) ……………… ...................... ..........................(cid:7271) (..................................(cid:7271)) (cid:7409)
   (cid:6981)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7286) 
 ((cid:7298))  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
( (cid:6979) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) )
(cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069) / (cid:7021) , (cid:7408)    (cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
96 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272)-9
[ 11(7)]
 (cid:7367) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7074)
(cid:7408) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (cid:7409)  …………………….. (cid:6981) (cid:7408)
(cid:7008)  (cid:6981) …………………...........(cid:7367)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)  ………..
…………………………....................................................... ( ., , /-,  (cid:6996) 
 (cid:7011)  )(cid:7286)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7300)       (cid:7367) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7074)       (cid:7021)  
  (cid:7408)     (cid:7289) (cid:7004) (cid:7020)      (cid:7264)  (cid:7408).........................................     (cid:7300) 
 (cid:7272) 
(cid:7289) (cid:7021)   (cid:7013)   (cid:7373)  (cid:7264) :
1. ............................   (cid:7008)   //   (cid:7277) (cid:7277)      
  (cid:6989)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6981)     ...............................     (cid:6989)     (cid:7277)  ;
2. (cid:6989)     (cid:7289)  /   (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)  ,      ;
3. (cid:6989)   (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7277) (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)/(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286), (cid:7289) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7008) 
(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)    .
(cid:7289)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7264)  (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7300) (cid:7409)  , (cid:7008) (cid:7286),   /     (cid:7289) (cid:7008) (cid:7286)
(cid:7021)   (cid:7264) 
(  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)/   )
 (cid:7079) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)   (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7288) ...................................(  )  
/    (cid:7289)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7286) (cid:7300)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7408) ,    (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)     
  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:6989)    ………………….()  /(cid:7407)  (cid:7408)   
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)
(cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069) /  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 97
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) - 10
[ 11(9)  64 (3) (xiii)]
(cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7334)(cid:6981)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
    (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7408)     (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7409) (cid:6990) …………….
 (cid:7021) …………...........   …………….......  ........................  (cid:7286)
(cid:7408) (  )………………........................………………………….............…………()  
 (cid:7016)           ………………................ (-/(cid:6979)/(cid:6991)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) /(cid:6989) -
(cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  .......................... ((cid:7407)(cid:6979)   ) (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)    
 (cid:6990)   (:) (cid:7410)-/
:-   :- (cid:6981):-
(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408)  
(cid:6979): - ((cid:7312))  (cid:6980)
(cid:7008)  (cid:7409)   :- , (cid:7408)    (cid:7278) (cid:7409)  ((cid:6991)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) /(cid:6991)  
  (cid:7286))
  (cid:7011)   
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
1.  (cid:7011)  :
I.  (cid:7409)  : ………………./…………………../………………………..
II. -/(cid:6979)  ……………………………………………………….
III.  (cid:7286)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)     (cid:7407)(cid:6979)    (cid:7409) :
.
.
.
2. (cid:7079)(cid:6979) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
I.   (cid:7018) ……………………………………………………………………..
II.   (cid:7407)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) /(cid:7272)(cid:7286)  (cid:7407) :…………………….
III. (cid:7407)     -(cid:7018) (cid:6989)  …………………………….
IV. (cid:7074)(cid:7298)     -(cid:7018) (cid:6989)  ……………………………………………..
V. (cid:7407) (cid:7286) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979)………………………………………………...
VI.   (cid:6979)  (cid:7407)……………………………………………………….
VII. (cid:7407) (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)……………………………………………………..
VIII.  (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)…………………………………………………………
IX.  (cid:7367)   (cid:7018)  – (cid:7079)(cid:6979),(cid:7408)   ……………………….
X.     (cid:6981)(cid:7298)   (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7385)  (    ,
(cid:7410)(cid:7004) -(cid:7079), , (cid:7021) -, (cid:7005) , (cid:6980), ,   ,   (cid:6981) (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7414)
  ) ……………………………………………………………………………………….
XI.   (cid:7408)   (cid:7018)    (cid:6981)(cid:7298)     
………………………………………………………………………………............................................................
3. (cid:7021) /(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  
I. (cid:7021) /(cid:7286)(cid:7076)  ……………………………………………………….
II. (cid:7007) /(cid:7079)(cid:6981)  (cid:7286) (cid:7263)…………………………………………….
III. (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) ……………………………………………………
IV.  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263) ………………………………….
V.   (cid:7079)  (cid:7083)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7004) …………………………………………..
VI.  (cid:7083)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  ………………………………………….
4.   (cid:7021)   :
I. (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)………………………………………………………………..
II. (cid:6981)  ……………………………………………………………….
III. (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004) ………………………………………..
IV. (cid:7408) (cid:7088) ,     (cid:7409)   , (cid:7408)   ,  (cid:7016)   (cid:6989)   (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7409) 
(cid:6981)……………………………….
V.    (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) ....................................................
5. (cid:6989)     (cid:7079) (cid:7272)   (cid:7286)   ?  □ (cid:7277) □
(cid:7408) (cid:7277)   ……………………………………..

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 99
6. (cid:6989)     (cid:6981) ((cid:6981)  :(cid:7021)    
(cid:7079))………………………………………………………….......................................................................................
…………………………………………………………………………………………………..........................................
7. (cid:6989)      (cid:6981) (cid:6981)  :(cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)(cid:7286) :
(cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  : ……………………………………..…
((cid:7407)(cid:6979)  /.…........./.… ()
 :   (cid:7409)  : ……………………
(cid:6981)  (cid:7374) (cid:7408)   : ………………………………
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
((cid:7407)(cid:6979) )
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 11
[ 12(1)]
  
((cid:7408) (cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)          (cid:7079) (cid:7286))
(cid:7408)-(cid:7008)  (cid:6981),  .....................
 .............................. ............................. 
  :
  ................................................  ............................
 .............................................................. (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). // (cid:6990) ..........................................
(cid:7407)(cid:6979)    ..............................     ..............................................
(cid:7409)   .............................................  (cid:7016)      ................................
((cid:7409)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7011) 
)
 (cid:7409) (cid:7088)

( 3 (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)  )

(  : 3  7 (cid:6981)   )
(cid:7008) 
((cid:7008)   : 7 (cid:6981)      )

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
100 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 (cid:7409) (cid:7020)  
 -/ (cid:6979) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  
(cid:6990)  
(cid:6994)     (cid:7409)   
(cid:7079)    (cid:7409)   
.(cid:7079).. (cid:7409)  54   (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409) 
 (cid:6981) 
 (cid:7409)   
 (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) 
 (cid:6981)     
(cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:7008) 
 (cid:7023)    (cid:6981) (cid:7408) : (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) 
   (cid:6979)  (cid:7286) 
(cid:7079)(cid:6979)() /(cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7408) (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)   ((cid:7021) 
 )
.............................................
 (cid:7409) (cid:7079)
( (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)       )
(cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)  (cid:7021)  
 (cid:7020)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ((cid:7079)(cid:7074) .1 (cid:7286) )  ……..
   
 (cid:6981) 
(cid:7407)(cid:6979)  (cid:7409)  ((cid:7079)(cid:7074) . 6 (cid:7286)) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 101
 (cid:7367)     .(cid:7079).. (cid:7409)  173    (cid:7407)(cid:6981) 
   (cid:7079)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981), (cid:7408)   
.(cid:7079).. (cid:7409)  251  (cid:6981) (cid:7407) 
 (cid:7023)  (………………..…… ................…  ) 
((cid:7023) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)       (cid:7391) (cid:7409)   )
.(cid:7079)..(cid:7409)  281   (cid:6981) (cid:7408)    (cid:7018) () 
(cid:7079) (cid:7023)  
    ( (cid:7021)     (cid:6994)    (cid:7286), (cid:7079)     
,      (cid:7409) 
 (cid:6981) 
() 
   (cid:7019)  (cid:6979) 
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)
(cid:7408)-(cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 12
[ 12(2)]
(cid:7408)-(cid:7008)  (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7074)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
:
…………….…………… ………………..…….. (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7074) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
(cid:7408)-(cid:7008)   (cid:6981)  :
(cid:7059) .  (cid:7334) (cid:7409)  (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7286) 

(cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7069)
(cid:7021)  1
(cid:7021)  2
(cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  (cid:7367) (cid:7088) (cid:7298)  
 (cid:6979) (cid:7409)  :
(cid:7088)    :
(cid:7407)(cid:7009) :
(cid:7079) (cid:7021)(cid:7069)  (cid:7367)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
102 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 (cid:7409) :
(cid:6989)   (cid:6994)    :
(cid:6981) :
   (cid:6981) 
  (cid:7008)  
(cid:7298) (cid:7409) .
(cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) 
  (cid:7407) (cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) l
(cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)
(cid:6990) 
 (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (cid:7286)
(cid:6981)(cid:7407)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:7288)
(cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7306) 
   
 (cid:7409)    (cid:6981) (cid:7286)  
(cid:7408)(cid:7021)   
4   4  6     (cid:6981) 

(cid:6981) 
6  


(cid:7008) 

  
 (cid:7271)    (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) 
 (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7004)    (cid:7298)       (cid:6981)(cid:6989) (cid:7408)
 (cid:7408).(cid:7008) ..  (cid:7079) (cid:7008) (cid:7298)    (cid:6981) /
  (cid:7408) (cid:7021) (cid:7407)   (cid:7009) /

(cid:7021) (cid:7407)  (cid:7408) 

((cid:7079)(cid:7021) /

(cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059))

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 103
(cid:7298) (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)    (cid:7298)  (cid:7079) ( (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)   (cid:7016)  (cid:7286))
(cid:7079)(cid:7009)  /, (cid:7408)    (cid:7409)  (cid:6981)
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________
(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)  / 
. (cid:7079)  . ________________________________________________________________
. (cid:7021) : 1 ________________________________________________________________
. (cid:7021) : 2 ________________________________________________________________
(cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7069) (cid:7021) - 1 (cid:7021) - 2
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 13
[ 13(8)(iv)]
(cid:6979)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6994)  (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)
………………………………………………………. ………………………………………………  (cid:7286)
(cid:7079)..(cid:7407). ..………………………………..  
…………………………………...........................................
……………………………………………………………………………………….…. (  ), 
………….…………………..  ...............……,  ………………………    (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6981)  (cid:7263)
     ...............................................................................((cid:6979) (cid:7021)   ) (cid:7286)   
(cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)  –
(cid:6979) : ………..…………..……………… ....................…………..
  …………………………………………………………………
   ……………………………………………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
104 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7278) (cid:7409)  ……………………………………………………………
  (cid:7409)  ………………………………………………………..
1.      ……………………………………………………………...
……………………………………………………………………………………………….
………………………………………………………………………………………………
2. (cid:7334)    ((cid:7079) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286))
…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
3. (cid:7020)       (cid:6979) (cid:7079):……………………………….
………………………………………………………………………………………………
4.  (cid:7298)   ?…………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………….
5.  (cid:7367) (cid:7409)   :(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079): ( :(cid:7021) (cid:6980) (cid:7409)    (cid:7409) 
………………………………………………………………………
I.  (cid:7021)  (cid:7016) 
. (cid:7272) (  ) -  : • -, (cid:7021) (cid:7074), -(cid:7088).
. (cid:7018)  ( (cid:7408) ) -  : • (cid:7020) , - , :(cid:7021) (cid:7408)(cid:7059)-, (cid:7018) (cid:7334), 
, (cid:6980)/    (cid:7409) (cid:6991) ,  (cid:7021)   
II. (cid:7275)( (cid:7409) ) – (cid:7018)  (cid:7271): • (cid:7004) , (cid:7061), , (cid:7008) , , , , , (cid:7061),
(cid:6979)(cid:7004) .
III. (cid:6980)  (cid:7021)  ( (cid:7408) ) - (cid:7018)  (cid:7271) • , (cid:6981), , , (cid:7008) , (cid:7020) (cid:7059), (cid:7082), (cid:7407)
(cid:7397)  (cid:7021) .
IV.  () –  (cid:7079)(cid:7019) • “   (cid:6989)  ?” • “   (cid:7289) (, , ,  ,  (cid:6996) )?” • “
 (cid:7408)    (, , (cid:6981), (cid:7009)   (cid:7408),  (cid:6981)  )?” • “ (cid:7408) (cid:7021) (cid:7286) ,(cid:7289)    
?”
V.    ( (cid:7409) ) . (cid:7074) - (cid:7018)  (cid:7271): • , ,  .  - (cid:7018)  (cid:7271): • (cid:7087), ,
(cid:7008) , -. .  ().
VI.   ( (cid:7409)  ): (cid:7021) (cid:7407) (cid:7021)  –  (cid:7079)(cid:7019) : • “     (cid:7289) ?”
• “(cid:6989)   (cid:7271)(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)/ (cid:7286) / (cid:7408)  ? ” • “(cid:6989)    (cid:7286) (cid:7004) (cid:7079)(cid:7407)//(cid:7021)  
/(cid:7074)   (cid:7263) (cid:7289)?” • “(cid:6989)    / (cid:7263) (cid:7289)?”
VII. (cid:7079)( (cid:7408) ): (cid:7008) (cid:7407) (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7334)    
VIII.    (cid:7410) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)( / (cid:7409) ): (cid:6981), (cid:7079), , (cid:6979)(cid:7004)    (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7019) (cid:7298)  (cid:7004) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)
(cid:7079)  (cid:7021)  - (cid:7018)  (cid:7271):   (cid:7023) , (cid:7407)(cid:7021), -, (cid:7021) (cid:6981), , (cid:7407)(cid:7088)(cid:6981).

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 105
IX.   (/ (cid:7408)  )
X. (cid:7004)   (cid:7410) – (cid:7016) 
XI. (cid:7407) (cid:7407) (/ (cid:7408)  ) –
XII. (cid:7007)  (/ (cid:7408) ) –
XIII. (cid:6991) /(cid:7019)  : (cid:7021)/ (cid:7021)
6. (cid:6979)/(cid:7018)  (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7059) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)
•
(cid:6981)(cid:7059)   (cid:7079) …………………………………………………….
•
(cid:7004)  (cid:7021)  …………………………………………………………..
•
 …………………………………………………………………………….
•
(cid:6981)/(cid:7020)  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  ………………………………………………………
7. (cid:7018) (cid:7334)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) ……………………………………….
8. (cid:7016) / (cid:7278) (cid:6981)  (cid:7397) ………………………………………
 (cid:6979)  , (cid:6981)(cid:7059)(cid:7298)/(cid:7312) (cid:7286)   (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6994)   (cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:6991) ,
(cid:7407) ((cid:7018) (cid:7334)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7300)       (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7019)  ,  (cid:7004)   )
 : / /
(cid:7021)  :
 :
 :
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) :
(cid:7407)/(cid:7020) (cid:6981): ………………
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) / 
(cid:6981): ……………………………………..…
((cid:7407)(cid:6979)  … ../. …./.… ()

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
106 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 14
[ 7 (ii), 13(8)(vi)( ) (), 17(vi), 19(20), 65(3)(viii), 69(2), 69 (4), 69(1), 69(3)]
 (cid:6981) (cid:6981)
(cid:7079)..(cid:7407). / .
:
 
 (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7021)  : , , (cid:7008) , (  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6994)    (cid:7286))
(cid:7407)(cid:6979)   / (cid:7016)  /(cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  :
………………………………………………..
   :
:
(cid:7410):
  :
  :
(cid:7278) (cid:6990) .
(cid:7278) (cid:7409) :
(cid:7021)  / (cid:7409)  :
 (cid:7020)       (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7009) –
 (cid:7409)      (cid:6979)
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 107
(cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
(cid:6981)  (cid:6980)  (cid:7409) (cid:7019) 
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
108 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 
(cid:7407) :
(cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
-(cid:7021) ,   
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
(cid:7373)  -(cid:7334) 
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 109
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
(cid:7021) -    (cid:7079)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981), (cid:6979)            (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
(cid:7021) (cid:7074) (cid:7271)    
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
110 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 (cid:7018) (cid:6981),  (cid:7410),   (cid:7367) (cid:6979) (cid:7378)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7004) (cid:6981) 
 (cid:6994)     (cid:7079) (cid:7408)  
 :
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7407) :
 :
  
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 :
 
(cid:7407) :
 (cid:7298)     (cid:7008) ,  , (cid:7008)  (cid:7408)
(cid:7079) (cid:6980) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:6980) (cid:7016)  (cid:7407),(cid:6981) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)   (cid:6991)  (cid:7409) 
 (cid:7016)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)      (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  ((cid:7021)  /  /   (cid:7008) )
(cid:7020)       (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7397)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7367) (cid:7409)  (cid:7061) (cid:7079)
(cid:6994)  (cid:7367) (cid:7021) (cid:6981)   (cid:7300)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  
(cid:6994)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7409) (cid:6994)  
(cid:6994)   (cid:7018)   
  (cid:6981)      (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:6994)    (cid:7286) (cid:7407)   (cid:7367)   
  (cid:6994)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)
(cid:7408).(cid:7008) ../ ...

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 111
(cid:7079)(cid:7074) 15
[ 17 (i)]
 (cid:7016)   (cid:7367)  (cid:6979)   
 .…………………………...
   ……………………..
1. (cid:6994)    …………………………………………………..
2. //(cid:6979)   ((cid:7408) (cid:7011)  )………………….
3. (cid:6994)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409)  ………………………………………
4. (cid:6994)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7018) (cid:7334)   ………………………………
5. (cid:7278) (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7298)   (  (cid:6979) (cid:6994)   ) ………………...
6. ... (cid:7367) (cid:7407)  (     )
I.  (cid:7408) (cid:6994)      (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)  
II. (cid:6994)  (cid:7409)     
III. (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   
IV. (cid:7407) (cid:6979)
V. (cid:7363) (-, (cid:6979)   (cid:7271)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021)  (cid:7018) (cid:7334) (cid:7367), (cid:7408)  )
VI.   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7334)   
VII. (cid:6979)(cid:7414)/  (cid:7409)  ((cid:7408)  )    
VIII. (cid:7021)   
IX.   ( (cid:7020) (cid:6981))
X.  (cid:7008)   .
7. (cid:7408)(cid:7004)      (cid:7061) (cid:7271)  ………………….
8.   (cid:7407)(cid:6981), (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 22 (cid:7286)
9. (cid:7334)      (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 7. ……………………………………………..
10. (cid:6981) (cid:6981), (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 14……………………………………………………
11.   , (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 43………………………………………………………………
12. (cid:7079)(cid:6996) /-  /    (cid:7312)((cid:7408)  (cid:7298))   (cid:7286)  , (cid:7021)   
:
(cid:7021)  :
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
 (cid:7016)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
112 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 16
[ 17(v), 20(2)]
 (cid:7016)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)

………….…………… …………………..  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981).
...  
(cid:7059) (cid:6990)   (cid:7334) (cid:7409)  (cid:7408) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)  
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)
(cid:7021)  1
(cid:7021)  2
(cid:7021)  3
(cid:7021)  4
...   (cid:7298)  
(cid:7059) (cid:6990)     (cid:7286)          (cid:7286)   
(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) 
(cid:6990)  (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (cid:6990) 
 
   (cid:7407)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6990) 
- (cid:7008)  ... (cid:7286)    -   (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). (cid:7074)  (cid:7409)
/(cid:6979)/ (cid:7021) (cid:7021)  ...    (cid:7079)   /(cid:7079)/(cid:7019)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7021) (cid:7286)
(cid:7018) (cid:7334)            
/(cid:6989)  (cid:7021) (cid:7407)     (cid:7408).(cid:7008) .. (cid:7079)(cid:7414)
(cid:7021)   (cid:6989)   (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
  (cid:7407) 
(cid:7409) 
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/(cid:7021)  (cid:7367) -(cid:7298) (cid:7409) 
 (cid:7409) :
-    :
 (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7009) /……………..
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 113
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 17
[ 18(2), 19(25)]
(cid:6994)     (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)      (cid:7409)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
 ……………………….
 (cid:7016)    (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  ……………………………………….
(cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409)  .............……………………… (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     ............……………………..
(cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7021)  …………………………………
1. (cid:6994)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7018) (cid:7334)   :
I. (cid:7018) (cid:7334)   ………………………….
II. (cid:7083)………………………..
III. (cid:7410)…………………………
IV.  …………………
V. (cid:6981)  (cid:6990)  …………………
VI. (cid:7018) /………………..
VII. /.../   ………………….
2. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)  :
I.  ((cid:7408)  ) ………………………..
II.  ( (cid:7286)/(cid:6989)       (cid:7286) ) ……………
III. (cid:7289) …………
IV.  (cid:7022)………………………………………
V. (cid:6994)  (cid:7409)  ………………………..
3. -/ (cid:6979)   ((cid:7408) (cid:7011)  ):
I.  …………………………………
II. …………………………………..
III. ……………………………….
IV. (cid:6981)()(cid:6990) ……………………….
V. (cid:7018) …………………………………
4. (cid:7021)   (cid:6994)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263)…………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
114 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
5.  (cid:7018) (cid:7334)     (cid:6994)    :
I.  …………………………………
II. …………………………………..
III. ……………………………….
IV. (cid:6981)()(cid:6990) ……………………….
V. (cid:7018) …………………………………
6. (cid:6994)  (cid:7408) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)   ? …………………….
7. (cid:6994)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)  /   (cid:6994)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)  ………………………………………
8. (cid:6994)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407) (cid:7021) …………………………………………..
9. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:6994)    ……………………………..
10. (cid:6994)   .../ (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)    ……………………….
11. (cid:6994)   (cid:7407)     (cid:7408)   (cid:7079) ? ……………………………..
12. (cid:6989)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   (cid:7409)   ? ……………………………..
13. (cid:6989)     (cid:7408)   ? …………………………………………….
(cid:6994)   (cid:7021) (cid:6979)/   
(cid:6994)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7018) (cid:7334)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)/   
-(cid:7021)  / (cid:7408)   /  (cid:7016)   / /(cid:7407)(cid:6979)
/(cid:6981)     (cid:6981)/ (cid:7016)   / (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/...  (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:7334)// 
(cid:7407)/ (cid:7021)    (    ,  )
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 18
[ 18 (5), 18 (9)  19 (26) ]
  (cid:7408) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)    
( /(cid:6989)  /)
 .………………………………
 (cid:7286),
(cid:7079) ,
(cid:7408)  (cid:7016)  , (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (   (cid:6979)) , 2015  (cid:6981)  -   
.............................. (  ), (cid:7074)/(cid:7074) (cid:7088)................................................................……….,
.............……….................................................. .............................…………………............ , 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 115
................, 201 .. ............(cid:7408), ..................................  ,  //(cid:6989)  
........................................................(cid:7286)      (cid:7289)
(cid:6981)(cid:6989)     ,(cid:6981)      (cid:7079) ((cid:7004) (cid:7004) ) (cid:7286)    
/(cid:6989)  / (cid:7286)    (cid:7079) (cid:7408)     (cid:7407)(cid:7004) (cid:6989)       
(cid:6981)/    / -(cid:6981)    
 (cid:7021) (cid:6979)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7409)   
 .....
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/ (cid:7021)
 (cid:7016)  
(cid:6991) :
 (cid:7409) (cid:7079)      ,     (cid:7334)   ,    :
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 19
[ 18(8), (19(7)]
   (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286),
  - , (cid:6979)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:7334) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)    
.............................20   .
……………………………………………………………………   (cid:7286)
 ...............................    (cid:7408) .......................................................................   
(cid:7019)     ...................................................()..............................................................()  (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:6980)
(cid:7074)   (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)      (cid:7020)   (cid:7408)    (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)      

  (cid:7011) (cid:7016)   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     :.............................................................................
 (cid:7408)   (cid:7289)(cid:7408)  ....................................................................()  .......................
.................()   .................................................. ()  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)     (cid:7013)  (cid:7288) (cid:7298):
1. (cid:7019)    (cid:7079)(cid:6980)-(cid:7074)    (cid:7018) (cid:7334)    -     (cid:7079)(cid:6980) (cid:7074) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)
(cid:7079)(cid:7021)  
2. ....................................   .......................................................................  
3. ...................................................................  (cid:7409)    .................................................
  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7277)  
4.    (cid:7378) /(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)      .......................................(cid:7378)
/(cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  ((cid:7408)     ) (cid:7378)/(cid:7079)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  
5.  (cid:7409)     (cid:7018) (cid:7334)  (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
116 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
6.    (cid:7004) (cid:7298)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7277)       (cid:7271)(cid:7373)      

7.   (cid:7408)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7076)(cid:7018) (cid:7298)       .
8. (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7300)      (cid:7367) -  (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)    
 .........
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/ (cid:7021)
 (cid:7016)  
 (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7008)    (cid:6981),  (cid:7409)   
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 20
[ 18(8)]
- ,  (cid:6979)  (cid:6989) (cid:7018) (cid:7334) (cid:7367)
-(cid:7074)
(cid:7289), ……………………   …………… …………………..……………..
,/.....................………  ……………………………………..(cid:6996)
…………..…………………..,(cid:7375)   (cid:7264)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7016)  ,................................    (cid:7013)
(cid:7299)    ............................................ ...............................((cid:6994)   ).....................()  (cid:7289),   -
 (cid:7286)   (cid:6994)  (cid:7264) :
1. (cid:7408)      (cid:7289)     (cid:7271) 
2.       (cid:7286) , (cid:7289)    (cid:7016)   (cid:6979) (cid:7409)    (cid:7004)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  (cid:7271)  
   (cid:6989)  (cid:7079) (cid:7272)I
3.  (cid:7272)(cid:6991)   (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  
4.  (cid:7367) -  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7300)   (cid:7272)      (cid:7286)    
(cid:7264)  I
5. (cid:7289) (cid:7079)(cid:6980)  (cid:7264) (cid:7408) (cid:7019)       (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7272) 
6.    (cid:7079)  (cid:7074)     (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286),     (cid:7271)I
 _____________
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
 (cid:7016)    (cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:6979)(cid:7407)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 117
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 21
[ 19(3)]
  (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)          
 (cid:7286),
 (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/-(cid:7079)/    (cid:7079)
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (cid:7409)  31(2) 
(cid:6981)..........................................................................(  ) ,...............() (cid:7074)/
(cid:7074)........................................................................................................................................  
(cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008) ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (cid:7409)  31  (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) 
, (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7263)  
  (cid:7408)   (cid:7289)(cid:7408) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)     (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7074) 22     (cid:7409)     
(cid:7408)   (cid:7289)(cid:7408)   (cid:7409) -(cid:7414)  (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7020)  (cid:7409)  - (cid:7409) 
  (cid:7408)   (cid:7289)(cid:7408)   (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ..............................()    (cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    
:
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/ (cid:7021)
 (cid:7016)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 22
 19(8)
   (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7019)         (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
(cid:7059).. ...............
 (cid:7016)    (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  .....................
 .............................
 (cid:7016)  / / (cid:6981)(cid:6981)/   (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) /    (cid:7079) (cid:7367)  (cid:7409) 
 (cid:7008)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) 
   (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)   :
1.  ...........
2. //(cid:7008)   (cid:6981)
3. (cid:7410)..........
4.  ...........
5. (cid:6981) .......
6.    .......

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
118 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
7.   ........
8.    .........
9. (cid:7021)  ...............
10.   (cid:7289)(cid:6981)...................
11.     ............
12. //(cid:7407)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6981) . ..................
13. (cid:7408)    : /(cid:7277)
(i) (cid:7088) (cid:6979)
(ii)  (cid:6979)
(iii) (cid:7407) :(cid:6989) 
(iv)  (cid:7272)  (cid:6979)
(v) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7016)  (cid:7286))

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 119
14. (cid:7407)  (cid:7011)  :
(cid:7059)..    (cid:7410) (cid:6979) (cid:7018)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7018) 
 (cid:7021)  (cid:7271)(cid:6991)  
(cid:6981)
(3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (10)
(1) (9)
(2) (8)
15. (cid:7407)   
i    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
ii    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
iii    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
iv    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
v    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
vi    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
vii    (cid:7091)(cid:6981) (cid:6981)//(cid:6981)(cid:6980)
16.  (cid:7408)    (cid:7004)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)  ,   (cid:7011)  :
17. (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)    (cid:6981), (cid:7408)   :-
(cid:7059). .      (cid:7409)  (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7408) 
(cid:7021) (cid:7272)  (cid:7010)  
(cid:7021)  (cid:7408) (cid:7263)  
1 
2  
3 
4  
5 
6 
7 (cid:7008)  (///
18. (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) (cid:7004) ...............................................................
19. - (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7407)(cid:7021)  ..........................................................
20. (cid:7008)   (cid:7004) (cid:6981) , (cid:7408)  .................................................................

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
120 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
21.  (cid:7409) (cid:7286)
() ()
(i) (cid:7083) (i)  (cid:6981)/  
(ii) (cid:7378) (ii) /  
(iii)  (cid:7312)    ((cid:7416)(cid:7020)  ) (iii) (cid:7021) (cid:7286) 
(iv)   (iv) (cid:7414) 
(v) (cid:6979)  (v) ///
(vi)  (cid:7008)  (vi)  (cid:7008) 
22. (cid:7353)(cid:7004)  (cid:7272).................................................
23. (cid:7004) (cid:7020)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7004)  - ......................................................
24.   (cid:6979) (cid:7011)  (  (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    √ (cid:7286))
(i) (cid:6979)
(ii)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
(iii)  (cid:6979)       (cid:7007) 
(iv)  (cid:6979)       (cid:7007) 
(v)  (cid:6979)   (cid:7007) 
25.  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7286)   (  (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    √ (cid:7286))
. / /
. /  (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) / (cid:6981) (cid:7016)  (cid:7021) 
.  (cid:7079)
. . . . .  (cid:7008)(cid:6981) (cid:7378)
26.   (cid:7079) (cid:6979)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7018) .............................................................
27.   (cid:7079) (cid:6979)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7018) ...................................................
28. (cid:7378)    (  (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    √ (cid:7286))
.   (cid:7007)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7004) (cid:7278) 
. (cid:7378)  (cid:6981)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7272) (cid:7409) 
. (cid:6979)(cid:7298)   (cid:7271)
.  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)
. (cid:7407)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 121
. - (cid:7409)  (cid:7004) 
. (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) 
. (cid:7378)  (cid:6990)  
. (cid:7378)     (cid:7021) 
.   (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7277)  
. (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)
. (cid:7378) (cid:7286) 
. (cid:7407) 
. (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
. (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
29. (cid:7018)  (cid:7079)(cid:6979), (cid:7408)  .............................................................................
30.   (cid:7011) , (cid:7408)  ..................................................................................
31.     (cid:7011) ..........................................................................................
32. (cid:6981)   ((cid:7018)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298)    ,   (cid:6989) (cid:7312)  (cid:7079)
(cid:7018) )....................................................................................................
33.  (cid:7074)  ( (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    √ (cid:7286))
() (cid:6979)
() (cid:6979)
()    (cid:6981)
()  (cid:7286) 
()  (cid:7286) 
()   (cid:7410) 
()   (cid:7410) 
() (cid:7018)  
()  (cid:7020)  
34. (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7018) ..........................................................................
35.   (cid:7079) (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7018) ....................................................................
36.     (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (  -  (cid:7079)  (cid:7016) 
).........................................................................................................
37.  (cid:7409)  (cid:7021)  ((cid:6981) (cid:7286)   )(cid:7286) ........................................
38.  (cid:7409) (cid:7407) (cid:7021)  ((cid:6981) (cid:7286)   )(cid:7286) ..........................................

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
122 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
39.  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  (cid:7021) 
(i) (cid:7019)   –  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(ii)   -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(iii) (cid:7074)   -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(iv)    -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(v) (cid:7265)   -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(vi) (cid:6981)   -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(vii)  (cid:7059)   -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(viii) (cid:7008) (cid:7074)    -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(ix)    -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(x) (cid:7407)   -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(xi) (cid:7074) (cid:6979)(cid:7074) (cid:7059)  -  /(cid:6980)/(cid:7277)  
(xii) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
40. (cid:6989)     (cid:7018)  ? /(cid:7277)
41.   (cid:6979)   (cid:6981) (cid:7408)    ?
(i)   – //(cid:7298)
(ii)  –
(iii) (cid:6979) – 
(iv) (cid:7074)
(v) 
(vi) (cid:7074) (cid:7088) 
(vii) /(cid:7021) / (cid:7008)  
(viii) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
42.        (cid:6981)/(cid:7079), (cid:7408)  
43.  (cid:7286)   (cid:7079) -  (cid:7272)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
44. (cid:7407)    ( (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    √ (cid:7286))
(i) -((cid:7312))/(cid:6979)((cid:7298))/ -((cid:7312)) (cid:7367) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)
(ii)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)
(iii)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7079)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 123
(iv) - (cid:7409) (cid:6981)
(v) -   (cid:7018) 
(vi) -  
(vii) - (cid:7409)  (cid:7004)  
(viii) (cid:6981)
(ix) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
45. (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)      /(cid:7277)
46.   (cid:7263) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)( (cid:7079)(cid:6996)   √ (cid:7286))
(i)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981) – -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008) ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
(ii) (cid:7407) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)
(iii)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981) – -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
(iv) (cid:7008)  - -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
47.   (cid:7263) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) ( (cid:7079)(cid:6996)    √ (cid:7286))
(i)     – -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
(ii) (cid:6981)     - -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
(iii) (cid:6979) (cid:7407) - -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
(iv) (cid:7272)(cid:7373)  - -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
(v) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286)) - -//(cid:6989) /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
48.   
(i)   (cid:7408)  
(ii) (cid:7008)        
(iii) (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
49. (cid:6989)            (cid:7009)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6981)    ( (cid:7018) )
(cid:7408)  ? /(cid:7277)
50. (cid:6989)    (cid:6979)    (cid:7286)   ? /(cid:7277)
51. (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7367)   (cid:6981)     (cid:7408)
 ? /(cid:7277)
52.  (cid:7021) / (cid:6981)  (cid:6989)    , (cid:7408)  
53. (cid:6981)  (cid:7011)  ( (cid:7408) , , (cid:6981) ,   (cid:7011) , (cid:7407) , (cid:7407),  (cid:7007) (cid:7021)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  
, (cid:6989)     (cid:7008)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7367)      (cid:7018) (cid:6981) (cid:7408)  /(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)  ,
 (cid:6981)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7079) )
54. (cid:6981)  (cid:7079)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
124 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
55. (cid:6989)     (cid:7408)   
56. (cid:6981)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:7409)  (cid:6981), (cid:7408)  
57. (cid:7008)   (cid:7407)(cid:7009) 
  (cid:7286)(cid:7079)(cid:6979) 
1. (cid:7004)  
2. (cid:7407) (cid:7021) 
3. 
4.   (cid:7414) 
5. (cid:7021) (cid:7312)     
6.   (cid:7019)  (cid:7286)   /    (cid:7289)
7.    (cid:6979)    (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  
8. (cid:6980)  (cid:6981) (cid:7408) , (cid:7409) 
9. : (cid:6980)  (cid:7016) 
10. (cid:7414) 
11.   (cid:7407)   (cid:7408)   ,    (cid:7019) 
12.  (cid:7021) /  (cid:6981)  (cid:7020)    , (cid:7408)  
13.  (cid:7409) (cid:6980)  (cid:6981)  :(cid:7409)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)/ (cid:6981) (cid:7409)
(cid:7407)    
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
((cid:6989)  (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989) )
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 23
[ 19(22)]
  (cid:7012) (cid:7414)    
.....................
 (cid:7286),
 (cid:7016)  


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 125
(cid:7289)/ ................................... (/(cid:7298),  ) ...................... (   ).... (cid:6981) (cid:7409)      (cid:7079)
 (cid:7016)    (cid:6979) ............... (  )  (cid:7012) (cid:7414)   , (cid:6989) (cid:7298)(cid:7408)................................. ((cid:7012) (cid:6981) 
)
/(cid:7286)  (cid:6980)     (cid:7016)    (cid:6979)    (cid:7264)/  (cid:7289) ................................. (  ) 
(cid:7012) (cid:7414)   (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7277) (cid:7408)    (cid:7272)  (cid:7079) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  (cid:7408) (cid:6994)  
(cid:7004) (cid:7061)    (cid:7408)      (cid:7004)  (cid:7277)    (cid:7012) (cid:7414)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7289)    (cid:7264)
(  ((cid:7298))   (cid:7021) (cid:6979))
    ((cid:7408)  (cid:7016)     )
  
..........................................
((cid:7007) (cid:6979)/(cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979))
 (cid:6979)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   
  (cid:7021)  (cid:7021)  : ......................................
...............................
.................................
(cid:7021) ..................................
(cid:7079)(cid:7074) 24
[ 19(22)]
  (cid:7298)  (cid:7012) (cid:7414)    (cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7409) 
 (cid:6990)  ...................
(cid:7289)/ ............................... ((cid:7407)(cid:7407) / ) ........................... (cid:7298) , .................... (cid:6981) 
() (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7409)  ................ ,  (cid:7012) (cid:7414)  (cid:7289)
(ii) (cid:7289)/    (cid:6994) (cid:7298)       (cid:7408) (cid:7021) , , (cid:7409), , , (cid:7408) (cid:7079) 
  (cid:7012) (cid:7414)   (cid:7264)/ (cid:7289)
(iii) /(cid:7286) (cid:6979)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981) (cid:7408)           (cid:7408) (cid:7289)/  (cid:7012) (cid:6981)   60 (cid:7286) (cid:7408) 
     (cid:7264)/ ,(cid:7289)   /  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   / /(cid:6994) 
   (cid:7277) 
(iv) /(cid:7286) (cid:7012) (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)(cid:7312)   (cid:7286)          (cid:7005)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7408) (cid:7012) (cid:6981)  (cid:7409)  
60(cid:7286) (cid:7408)  , /   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)   /  -    (cid:7009)   (cid:7408) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
126 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(v) (cid:7289)/  (cid:7264)/  (cid:7289) (cid:7408)    (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7286)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)  ((cid:7018) (cid:6989) (cid:7298)) (cid:7367) (cid:7408)
   (cid:7079)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)/   
(vi) (cid:7289)/  (cid:7264)/ (cid:7289) (cid:7408) /   (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) -((cid:7312))   (cid:7021)  - 
(cid:7021)  (cid:7298)        (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  
(vii) (cid:7289)/  (cid:7264)/ (cid:7289)/(cid:7277)  (cid:7264)/(cid:7277)   (cid:7289) (  (cid:7079)(cid:6996)  ,   √   )   (cid:7277)
 (cid:7264)/  (cid:7289)            /    
(viii) (cid:7289)/     (cid:7289)(cid:7408) (cid:7289)/ (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7007) (cid:6981)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7289)
............................. (cid:7286) (cid:7408) 
((cid:7012) (cid:7414)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989) ((cid:7298))  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)/  )
2. (cid:6979) (cid:7367) 
 (cid:7021) (cid:6979)  (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7012) (cid:6981)     
() :  (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979),    
............................................................................
...........................................................................
() :   (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979),    
........................................................................
.......................................................................
3.  (cid:7016)    (cid:7079)
 (cid:7367)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:6979) ()   (cid:7408)     (cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7263)
  (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:6979)(cid:7407) (cid:7408) 
 (cid:7016)    (cid:7021) (cid:7298)/(cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7074) – 25
 19(29)
(cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  
    (cid:7272)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:6991)     (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
1. (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298)) (cid:7409)   (cid:6979)  2015 (cid:7409)  38  .............  (cid:7016)   (cid:7286) 
(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7263)     (cid:6990)  ............  .......... (cid:7367) (cid:7020)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7286)/
  (cid:7021)  (  ) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286)   .............. (cid:7008)    (cid:7013)      (cid:7272)  (cid:7004) 
(cid:7061)  (cid:6991)   (cid:7408)   
•
(cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6979) / (cid:7016)  / (cid:7414)/ (cid:7414)/(cid:7008) 
•
   (cid:6979) ()   -((cid:7312))   (cid:6979) (cid:7367) (cid:7020) (cid:7408) (cid:7012) (cid:6981)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 127
•
      (cid:7016)  (cid:6979)      (cid:7021)   (cid:7020)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)   (cid:7367)
(cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7298)  (cid:7409)  40(1)  (cid:6981) -(cid:6979)  :(cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408) (cid:7289), 
 (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7408) (cid:6989)   (cid:7409)    -    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)  
      (cid:6981) (cid:7277) (cid:7408) 
2.  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408)
 -/ (cid:6979),  (cid:7011)  ,  (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)    (cid:7263) (cid:6981) (cid:7408)   
(cid:7286)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)   (cid:7289),  (cid:7407)(cid:7021) (cid:7272)     (cid:7407)    
(cid:7009)   
 -/ (cid:6979)  - , (cid:6979)  (cid:7079)(cid:7074) (cid:7286) (cid:6989)  (cid:7272)        
(cid:7408)  (cid:7079)      (cid:7079)(cid:7407) (cid:7277)    (cid:7409)  (  )   (cid:7008)       
(cid:7020)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) /   (cid:7021) ,  (cid:6989)  (cid:6994)  (cid:7409) (cid:7013)  (cid:7301)  , (cid:7411)(cid:6991)  (cid:7286) (cid:6994) (cid:7298) 
(cid:7061)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7019)  (cid:7011)      (cid:7004)  (cid:7061)  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)    (cid:6994) (cid:7298) 
(cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7286)  
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)
  (cid:7007) (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)
( (cid:7016)   (cid:7409) )
 :
(cid:7021)  :
 (cid:7286) :     (cid:7021) /(cid:7020)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7061) (cid:7286)/  (cid:6979)  –  (cid:7019)  (cid:6981)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7074) 26
[ 20(1)]
 (cid:7367)  (cid:7409)    (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
 (cid:7409)    (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
(         (cid:7079) (cid:7408) )
 (cid:7016)   ,  ………………
  ............................., .........................................  (cid:7286) 
  :
 ................................................ ......................................................
:................................................................... (cid:7079)..(cid:7407). // . .......................................
(cid:7407)(cid:6979)    ...............................   
............................................
 (cid:7409) (cid:7020)  
 -/ (cid:6979), (cid:6981) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  
 . 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
128 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
  (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409)   
(cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7409)   
.(cid:7079).. (cid:7409)  54   (cid:7004)   (cid:7409) ((cid:7408)  )
 (cid:6981)
 (cid:7409)    (cid:6981) (cid:7409) :-
 (cid:6981) (cid:7286)    :-
(cid:6981)(cid:6981)  
 (cid:7023)    (cid:6981) (cid:7408)   : (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004) 
  (cid:7021)
 (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7286)   ((cid:7021)    )
................... .........................
 (cid:7079)
(     (cid:7079)   (cid:7408) (cid:7409)  )
(cid:6981) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7021)  
 (cid:6981) 
  (cid:7407)(cid:6981) ((cid:7079)(cid:7074) .22) 
   (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981), (cid:7408)   
   
    ( (cid:7021)     (cid:6994)    (cid:7286), (cid:7079)   
  ,      (cid:7409) 
() 
   (cid:7019)  (cid:6979) 
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)
 (cid:7016)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 129
(cid:7079)(cid:7074) 27
[ 21(2)  22 (2)]
(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (     (cid:6979)) , 2015   (cid:6981)
   (cid:7021)         (cid:7074)
1.    (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    /(cid:7021)   :
I. (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) ………………………………….
II. (cid:7021) /   ………………………
III.     (cid:7021) /   (cid:7409)   (cid:6990)  ((cid:6991)  (cid:7286) –   
(cid:7021)   -, (cid:7021)   (cid:6980)) …………………………………
IV. (cid:7021) /     (cid:7409)   …………………
V. /(cid:7021) /    .......................
VI.  /   (cid:6990) ………………………………………………
VII.  / (cid:6989)  (cid:6990)  …………………………………………………………
VIII. -  ……………………………………………………………..
IX. (cid:6989)      (cid:7021)    (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6996) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7312)  
…(cid:7286) ………………………………..
X. (cid:6989)   (cid:6981) (cid:7021) /      (cid:7408)   ?  /(cid:7277)
XI. ...    (cid:7374) (cid:7408)    (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:6990) 
()  (cid:7409) ........................
() (cid:7408)  (cid:7367)      (cid:7408)  .............
XII. ...  (cid:7271) (cid:7286)     ..................................................
2. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     (cid:7021)    ……………………….
I. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)    (cid:7021)    ...............
II.    (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:7021) /(cid:7079)………………………..
III.    (cid:7021)       (cid:7021)  (cid:7021) 
IV.  /  .…………………………….
V.   / (cid:6989)  .……………………….
VI. -  …………………………..
3. (cid:7263)  (cid:7021)  ((cid:7079)(cid:7021)     (cid:7021)      ):
I. (cid:6990)  (cid:6981) ……………………
II.  (cid:7021) (cid:7289)………………….
III.  (cid:7021) ………………..
IV.  (cid:7008)  …………….
4. 
I. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ( )………………
II. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ( )……………….
III. (cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  ( ) …………………..
IV. (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  ………………………….
V.   (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7079) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286) ( (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7271) )…
VI. (cid:7079)(cid:7004)       (cid:7408) (cid:7079)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)  ?(cid:7289) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
130 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
I. 
II. 
III.  (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 
IV.    (cid:7079)
V.   (cid:7021) (cid:6994)  (cid:7409)  (cid:7021) :
VI. /(cid:7409) /(cid:7074)
VII.   
VIII.  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)
IX.  (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 
X. (cid:7408) /  (cid:6979) (   ) ((cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286))
5. (cid:7021) /  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)
I. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (0-6 (cid:6981))  (cid:7286) (cid:7021), ((cid:7408)  (cid:7298))
II. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (6-10 (cid:6981))  (cid:7286) (cid:7021), ((cid:7408)  (cid:7298))
III. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (11-15 (cid:6981))  (cid:7286) (cid:7021), ((cid:7408)  (cid:7298))
IV. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (16-18 (cid:6981))  (cid:7286) (cid:7021), ((cid:7408)  (cid:7298))
V. (cid:7018) (cid:7334)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (18-21 (cid:6981))  (cid:7286) (cid:7021), ((cid:7408)  (cid:7298))
6 (cid:6989)   (cid:7016)    (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7021) (cid:7298)   (cid:7286)     
/(cid:7277).
7. (cid:7011)  
I. (cid:6979)  …………………………
II. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)   (cid:7079),  (cid:7409) (cid:7004)     (cid:7079) ……………………
III.  (cid:7008)     (cid:6981)    (cid:7079) 
8. (cid:7021)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 
I. (cid:7021)    (cid:7011)  …………………………………………………
II. (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:6991)    ………………………………
III.   
IV.   (cid:7079)  
9.  (cid:7409) (cid:7020)  ((cid:7021) /)
I.  2 (cid:7300) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  /(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
() ((cid:7414) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286))
II. (cid:6991)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) /(cid:7409)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7007)   (cid:6991)  (cid:7286) ( (cid:7414)   (cid:7016)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) )
III. (cid:7407)(cid:7004) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) / (cid:7409) 
IV. (cid:6989)     () , 1976  (cid:6981)   ( (cid:7079) (cid:7074) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286))  
(cid:7300)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)       ((cid:7079) (cid:7021)  (cid:6991)  (cid:7286))
V.   (cid:7300)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)       ( (cid:7021)  (cid:6991) )
VI.   (cid:7409)   (cid:7008) (cid:7090)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  ((cid:7408)  ) (cid:7021) (cid:7409)/(cid:7407)/(cid:7374)(cid:7019)  – (cid:7408)    (cid:7272) 
VII.   (cid:6981) (cid:7289)   , (cid:7081) ,  (cid:6990)  
VIII. (cid:6989)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)        (cid:7409) (cid:6994)   ?
IX.   (cid:7300)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:7016)  (cid:7286) :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 131
I.(cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
II.  (cid:7018)  
III.(cid:7079)(cid:7009)    
IV.  - (cid:7074).
(cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:6979)) , 2015  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979))
, 2016  (cid:7007)     
(cid:7289)   (cid:7264)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7263) (cid:7408)  (cid:7018) (cid:6989)    (cid:6981) (cid:7003)  (cid:7277) (cid:7408)       (cid:7408)  (cid:6981) 
(cid:7408)    (cid:7018) (cid:6981)   (cid:7088) (cid:6989)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:6991)       (cid:7408)   (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)  (cid:7409)
   (cid:7277) (cid:7408)  
………………………………(/(cid:7021)   )  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015
 (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:6994) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2016  (cid:6981),   (cid:7021)       (cid:6979)(cid:7312) (cid:7409)
(cid:7414)   
(cid:7289),   (cid:7286)   (cid:7264) (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7008) (cid:7076)/(cid:6996)    , (cid:7298), (cid:7408)(cid:7287) (cid:7298)  (cid:7312)  (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7300) 
 (cid:7272) 
(cid:7079)   (cid:7021) (cid:6979) : ……………………………..
:………………………………………..
…………………………
…………………………………..
………………………………………
……………………..
(cid:6981) :
(cid:7021) (cid:6979):
(cid:6979)  .1: …………………………………
(cid:6979)  .2: ………………………………………
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 28
[ 21(3)  22 (4)]
  (cid:7079)(cid:7074)
((cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7409)  41  )
(cid:7079)(cid:7272)  27   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)     (cid:7019) , (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) ,
2015 (cid:7409)  41(1)  (cid:6981), ............................ ,    (cid:7021)    ..................(cid:6981) (cid:7409)   
    ................... (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   
......................(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6979)   (cid:7021) , (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015  (cid:7408)
(cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2016  (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7367)       
    (cid:7007)  
……………..201  …………(cid:7408)
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))

  ……………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
132 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 (cid:6981)29
{  22(9) }
....  (cid:7334) (cid:7088) (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
1. (cid:7334) (cid:7088)   : …………………………..
2. (cid:7079)   : …………………………….
3.  (cid:7409) (cid:6990) : .…………………………….
4. (cid:7334) (cid:7088)    : ……………………………..
5. (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  : …………………………..
6. ………………..  (cid:7011) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:7011)
(cid:7059) /   / (cid:7278) (cid:7409)    (cid:7011) . (cid:7407)(cid:7009) , (cid:7408)
.       (cid:7409)  ..
 
  ,  

(cid:7408)
(cid:6979)
(cid:7011)


7.    (cid:7278) (cid:7263) (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6990) : …………………………
8.    (cid:7408) (cid:7334) (cid:7088) (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6990) : .................................
9.  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7008)(cid:7298)    (cid:7334) (cid:7088) (cid:7409) (cid:7312)   (cid:7408) :.............….......
10.  (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7008)(cid:7298)    (cid:7312)   (cid:7408) :……. ……….
(cid:7021)(cid:6979)
(cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7079)
 (cid:6981)30
{ 23(9)}
       (cid:7409) (cid:7007) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
 (cid:7409)  - ..................................................
 (cid:6981) (cid:6990): - ..................................................
 (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:6981)   - ..................................................
   (cid:7409)  - .................................................
 - (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7272)  -1     - II   (cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:6981) (cid:7367)    /
   (cid:7409) (cid:7334)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:7009)(cid:7298)   (cid:7016) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 133
 –I (cid:7021) (cid:7016)
 .    -  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7020) (cid:7000)     (cid:7286) 
 -  
 
(cid:7008)-  
(cid:7008) (cid:7021)
-      ( (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  )
 (cid:7023)
(cid:6981)
/
 (cid:7409) 
(cid:6981) (cid:6979) (cid:6991)
/(cid:7390)
(cid:6981) (cid:7334) / (cid:7079)(cid:7399)    
(cid:7414) 
(cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)
. (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7020) (cid:7000)      
(1) (cid:7388) (cid:7312)     - (cid:7409)     (cid:7020)(cid:7000)  (cid:6979)(cid:7385)   (cid:7286):
/(cid:7298)  -    (cid:7286)(cid:7011)
 
 

(cid:7398) /(cid:7407)
(cid:7390)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
134 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:6981) (cid:7390)
(cid:6981) 
(2)    (cid:7079)(cid:7004)/ (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (  / )     (cid:7410), (cid:6979) (cid:7021) (.. (cid:7079)(cid:7013), (cid:7004)(cid:7408))
 (cid:7008)-  (cid:7011)   (cid:7388)    (cid:7286):
(cid:7340)   (cid:7410) (cid:7008)- (cid:6979)  (cid:7021)
(3) (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7021)    (cid:7298)     (cid:7286) (cid:7388)  (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7286) :
    (cid:7021)(cid:7272)   (cid:7410) (cid:7390)
(4)   (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7408)      (cid:7390) (cid:7407)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) ( - ,(cid:7340)(cid:7298), (cid:7407)(cid:7019)(cid:7298)  (cid:7008) (cid:7298)
)  (cid:7408) (cid:7079)  (cid:7079) .
. (cid:7390) /  (cid:7011) ((cid:6995) 05 (cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7390) ) :
 
 (cid:7334)  (cid:7011)   (cid:6981)  / (cid:7021)  


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 135
 
 (cid:7334)  (cid:7011)   (cid:6981) / (cid:7021)  
)
 (cid:7275) (cid:7021) : (  (cid:7090)(cid:7298)    , , (cid:6981)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7312)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298) 
(cid:6979) (cid:7286)  )(cid:7286) : ……………………………………………………………….
................................................................................................................................
       (  (cid:7286) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7011)  (cid:7298)    )
(1)   (cid:7286) (cid:7408)   (cid:7289) (cid:7340)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7011) ...............................
(2)     (cid:7016) (cid:7286)     (cid:7289)       (cid:7286)   (cid:7340)     
(cid:7298).
 .         (cid:7390)  (cid:7079) :
(1)   (cid:7011)(cid:7298)    (cid:7008) (cid:7286)  (cid:7397)  (cid:7299)  (cid:7298) (cid:7408)    -   
 :(cid:7289) (cid:7408)       (cid:7016)     .(cid:7289) :
 )  (cid:7008) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)    (cid:7016)(cid:7011)  ;
 ) (cid:7340)     ;
 ) (cid:7008),  (cid:7016) (cid:7286) ……………………………
(2)          (cid:7397)  (cid:7299)  (cid:7298) (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   (cid:7390)(cid:7021)   (cid:7008) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)
  (cid:7286)  . (cid:7408)       (cid:7016)     .(cid:7289) :
 )     (cid:7286) ;
 )     (cid:7286)
 )   (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286);
 )  (cid:7277), (cid:6989)(cid:7298)(cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7277) ;
 ) (cid:7008),  (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286):
) -    (cid:7079) - / (cid:7407)  (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:7298), (cid:7407)(cid:7019)(cid:7298)  (cid:7004)(cid:7018)(cid:6981) (cid:7298)  (cid:7390) (-
  (cid:7079) (cid:7008) (cid:7004)(cid:7018) (cid:6981)(cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7340)    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  (cid:7079)    :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
136 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
. (cid:7340)      - (cid:7409)    (cid:7407)  (cid:7286)- :
1. (cid:7016) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7340) (cid:7409)    (cid:7409) (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7006)(cid:7007)(cid:7312)  - (cid:7408) (cid:7409)  (cid:7390)(cid:7021) (cid:7286) .
(2)   (cid:6981)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7407)      (cid:7298)  (cid:7340)    (cid:7409) (cid:7013)  . (  ,
- (cid:7360)/ )
(3)    (cid:7272) (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7397)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286).
(4)  - (cid:7340)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:7408)(cid:7333)     (cid:7407) (cid:7286)      
 (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)  (cid:7016) (cid:7286)
(5)  (cid:7340)    (cid:7286) (cid:7408)(cid:7333)     (cid:6989)  (cid:7407)         (cid:7298)
 )   ) (cid:7277)
(6) (cid:6989)      (cid:6994)  (cid:7018)  (cid:7007)    (cid:7004)     (cid:7004)  ?(cid:7289)
 )   ) (cid:7277)
.   (cid:7079)(cid:6979) (-   (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7011) (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)  ,   ,(cid:7340) (cid:7409) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  
 (cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979), (cid:7069)(cid:7410)  / (cid:7409)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298), (cid:7408)  (cid:7298),      -  (cid:7367)
(cid:7079)(cid:6979)   
. (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005) (cid:7021) (/(cid:7004)  (cid:7407))  /(cid:7298), (cid:7408)  , (cid:7409)   (cid:7407) (cid:7021)
   (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7408)  ,(cid:7407)(cid:7021)  (cid:7410)(cid:7071)  (cid:7061)(cid:7021)      (cid:7016) (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7407)
(cid:7408) (cid:7079)         (cid:7079)(cid:7021) (cid:7021)    (cid:7079)   .
(1) (cid:6989)   (cid:7409)/ /(cid:7360) (cid:7408) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   (cid:7061)(cid:7021)  (cid:7289)? (cid:7408) ,   (cid:7011)  (cid:7286).
(2) (cid:6989)   (cid:7409)/ /(cid:7360)    (cid:6980) /(cid:7391)(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7367)     ?
(3) (cid:6989)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7289).
(4) (cid:6989)     (cid:7286) (cid:7408) (cid:7340) (cid:7409)       .
(5) (cid:6989)  (cid:7407)   (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    
   -  (cid:7021)(cid:6979)


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 137
-II:
 (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:6981) (cid:7409) (cid:7016) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
((cid:7016) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)      (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7408) )
((cid:7298) /(cid:7079)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7013)(cid:7009) (cid:7286)    /(cid:7005)(cid:7298)    )
1. (cid:7005)(cid:7004) (cid:7016)
1. (cid:6989)  -1  (cid:7013)(cid:7009) (cid:7286) (cid:7414) (cid:7005)(cid:7298) / (cid:7021) (cid:7409)    (cid:7289)?
a.  / (cid:7277)
2. (cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7414) (cid:7005)(cid:7298)   (cid:7286)    (cid:6979)(cid:7004)   (cid:7407)(cid:7009)(cid:7298)  (cid:7397) (cid:7289)?
 / (cid:7277)
2. : (cid:7016) :
I.     -(cid:6981)
II. (cid:6989)    -  -  (cid:7334) (cid:7272)   -(cid:6981) (cid:7408) ?
III. (cid:6989)   - (cid:7340)  -       ?
2.2     (cid:7020)(cid:6981)
I.   -       (cid:7408) ?      - (cid:7021)
(cid:7021)  ?
II.       (cid:7408)-(cid:7408)  -(cid:6981) (cid:7408) ?
III. (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)  /(cid:7407)(cid:7019)   (cid:7409)? -(cid:6981)   (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  .(cid:7286)
IV. (cid:6989) (cid:7340)      (cid:7079)(cid:7004) ?
V. (cid:6989)   - -    -  ?(cid:7289)
VI. (cid:6989)   -  (cid:7340)     (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:7374)     ? (cid:6989)  
 (cid:7298)    (cid:7408)  ?
2.3 (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  - (cid:6981)
I. (cid:6989)    -  (cid:7407)  (cid:7008) (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  -(cid:6981) (cid:7408)  ? (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7021) 
    (cid:7286) (cid:6989)    ? (cid:6989)      (cid:7018) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286) (cid:7004)  (cid:7289)?
II. (cid:6989)  (cid:7407) (cid:7286)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  / (cid:7289)    (cid:7277)     (cid:7009) (cid:7021)    (cid:7286)
(cid:7263)       (cid:7408)     (cid:7409)    ?    
 (cid:7286)  (cid:7286) 
III. (cid:6989)    (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:6994) (cid:7298)   -     -   (cid:7286)  (cid:7409)
? (cid:7408)     (cid:7286)
IV. (cid:6989)   (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)   (cid:7277) (cid:7277)? (cid:7408)   - (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286) 
(cid:7408) (cid:7079)   (cid:7289)?
2.4 (cid:7004)  (cid:6979)
I. -    - (cid:7409) (cid:7004)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)  (cid:6989)  (cid:7289)? (cid:6989)   (cid:7004) 
(cid:7397)   (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)    (cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7286) (cid:6979) ?(cid:7289)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
138 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
II. (cid:6989)    (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7263) (cid:7004)  (cid:7021) ? (cid:6989)     (cid:7408) (cid:7004)  
(cid:7409) (cid:7407)  (cid:7289)?
2.5 (cid:7407)  (cid:7004)  (cid:6979)
I. (cid:6989)  -    -, (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) (cid:7407)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7397)  
(cid:6979) ?(cid:7289)
II. (cid:6989)  -    -  (cid:7407)  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7407)   
    (cid:7409)       (cid:7079)   ? (cid:7408)    
(cid:7286)
III. (cid:6989)  -    -, (cid:7409)    (cid:7286) (cid:7004)  (cid:7397)     
 ?(cid:7289)
3. -   (cid:7407)
3.1 (cid:6989)        -    - (cid:7409) (cid:7407)  (cid:7289) -  
-   (cid:7407)     (cid:6981)  (cid:7016)  (cid:7286)
3.2 (cid:7408) ,      -    - (cid:7409) (cid:7407) (cid:7277)   (cid:7289)  
(cid:7020) (cid:6981)/(cid:6981)    
(cid:7021) (cid:6979), , ,    
 (cid:6981)31
[ 23(4)]
 (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
 (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
(cid:7059)..  (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7004) 
1 (cid:7016)  (cid:7409) 
2 (cid:7416)(cid:7020)    (cid:7090)
  (cid:7061)  -  (cid:7378) (cid:7408) 
3
  (cid:7011) 
4   
5 (cid:7008) 
6 (cid:7008)   (cid:7021) 
7 
8 (cid:7020) (cid:7069)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 139
9 (cid:6981)
10 (cid:6979)
11 
12 (cid:6981) 
13  (cid:6981) (cid:6990) 
(cid:6981) (cid:7011) 
) (cid:7289) 
14
) 
15 (cid:7021)   (cid:7408) (cid:7021)       (cid:7004) (cid:7061) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)   
) (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
)     (cid:7021)  
) (cid:7407)   
16 (cid:7021)    (cid:7408) (cid:7021)   
  - (cid:7298)  (cid:7286) (cid:7289)
-      (cid:7289)
(cid:7020) (cid:7059) (cid:7407) ((cid:6981)  (cid:7300)  (cid:7271) , 
(cid:7410) (cid:7408))
-   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)  (cid:7289)
-  (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)  (cid:7289)
(cid:7079) 
(cid:7008) 
(cid:7289) …………………  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)  (cid:7264) (cid:7408) …………………………  (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7272) (cid:7286)   
  
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) :
(cid:7021)  :  :
 :  :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
140 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 32
[ 23(15)]
(cid:7407)  (cid:7286)-                 
(cid:7088) …………………  (cid:7088) ………...........  (cid:7074)/(cid:7074) (  ) ………………… (cid:7409)  
 …………………….,  (cid:7408) (cid:7407) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7272)   (cid:7088).......................... 
(cid:7088).............. (   (cid:6981) (cid:7013) )...............  (cid:6989)    ,  (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7007) 
(cid:7407)(cid:6981)           (cid:7021)    (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)   

   (cid:7021)  (  )…………………………......................... (cid:6989)     
(cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)           (cid:7021)    (cid:6989)   (cid:7408)   
() ……………………………..  (cid:6989)   (cid:7016)  / (cid:6981)(cid:6981) (  (cid:6981) (cid:7013) )
……………………………… (cid:7409)   (cid:7286) …………………………………………       (cid:7286)
(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/ (cid:7021)
 (cid:7016)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 33
[ 23(16)]
    (cid:7407)/         (cid:7367) 
(cid:7289)/…………………,  . ……… ………………../ …………… …………(cid:6996)
………/ ...................  (cid:7367) ---------------------()          (cid:7373)   (cid:7079)
(cid:7375)  / (cid:7264)/  (cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:7289)/ (cid:7013)    (cid:7300)  (cid:7007)   (cid:7016)   ………… 
 (cid:7298)   ........... (  ) ……… (cid:7409)    (cid:7004)   /(cid:7409) (cid:6994)  (cid:7264)/ (cid:6994)   (cid:7289):
I.(cid:7408)     (cid:7263)  (cid:7289)/ (cid:7004)     (cid:7272)/(cid:7272)/(cid:7286) 
II.    /   (cid:7286)    (cid:7289)/
 (cid:7016)   (cid:6979)    (cid:7079) (cid:7272)/ (cid:7272)/ (cid:7286)      (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  (cid:7272)/
(cid:7272)/ (cid:7286) 
III.  (cid:7061)(cid:7021)     (cid:7278) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)        (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) 
 (cid:7021) (cid:7021)   (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  
IV.(cid:7289)/  (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7272)/(cid:7272)/(cid:7286) 
V.(cid:7289)/  (cid:7019)     (cid:7079) (cid:7272)/(cid:7272)/(cid:7286) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7018) (cid:6981)   
VI.(cid:7289)/  (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7300)        /  (cid:7264)/  (cid:7289) 
VII.(cid:7289)/,   (cid:7019)       (cid:6979) (cid:7079)(cid:7021)      /  (cid:7264)/   (cid:7289)
VIII.(cid:7289)/    (cid:7079)  (cid:7074)       (cid:7004)       /  (cid:7264)/  (cid:7289)
……………………………….. .............
 (cid:7298)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)    ((cid:7298))  (cid:7021) (cid:6979)
( (cid:6979) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) (cid:7408) )
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/(cid:7021) ,  (cid:7016)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 141
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 34
[ 23(17)]
    (cid:7286)  
)  . .................
)   ……………………….
) ……………………………………..
) (cid:7410)……………………………………………
.)    (cid:7021)     , (cid:7408)  ,        (cid:7286) (cid:7408)   
……………………………………….
) (cid:6989)    
) (cid:7416)(cid:7020)     (cid:7008)  (cid:7090)………………………..
)     (cid:7286) (cid:7021)  (cid:7408)      (cid:7011) ,     (cid:7079)/-,  -,
(cid:7408) (cid:7011)  ,  (cid:7011)  ………………………..
) (cid:7021)   (cid:7011)  – (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)     (cid:7018) (cid:6989)     
)  (cid:7277)      (cid:7407) (cid:7409)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
)   (cid:7407)(cid:7407) – (cid:7018) (cid:6989)        (cid:7409)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
)  (cid:7007)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
)  (cid:7016)    
)       (cid:7286) (cid:7021)        
) ,     (cid:7407),  (cid:7407), (cid:7408) (cid:7011)  ,   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)(cid:7004)     ((cid:6990)  
(cid:7079) )
) ,      (cid:7409)   (cid:7004) ,    (cid:7004) (cid:6981) (cid:7023)   (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7079) 
(cid:7407)(cid:7407)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)(cid:7312)  (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
) (cid:7021)   (cid:7021)   (cid:7009)    (cid:7286), (cid:7009) (cid:7409)     (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
)     (cid:7407)  (cid:6994)     (cid:7409)  :
) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7004)  , (cid:7408)  
) (cid:6989)  (cid:7408)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
142 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 35
[ 23(18)]
    (cid:7407)(cid:7298)/       (cid:6979)
(    (cid:7286))
(cid:6979) (cid:7409)  :
)  :
) (cid:7008)     :
) (cid:7410)
)  (cid:7409) 
1.     -  (cid:7011) 
)     -  
) 
) (cid:6981) (cid:7011) 
i) (cid:7289) :
ii)  :
)  (cid:6981) (cid:6990)  :
.) -  
(  ( 
) )
3.     
) (cid:7407)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7263)  
((cid:6989)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407), (cid:7004)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)
(cid:7409) (cid:7020)       (cid:7263) ,  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)) (cid:6981)
(cid:7286) 
. (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005)  
) (cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005) (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7021) 
) (cid:7021) (cid:7021)    
)  (cid:7408)    (cid:7008)  
. (cid:7004)  (cid:7079)(cid:7008)    
  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)

)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7020)    ?
(i)  (cid:7367)  (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7079)(cid:7009)  (cid:7408) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 143
(cid:7061)/(cid:7298)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)  (cid:7286),
(ii)     -    (cid:7277)
-
 (cid:7007) , (cid:7407)(cid:6989)   (cid:7408)(cid:7059)(cid:7312)  
(cid:7286)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7289),
 (cid:7277)
(iii) (cid:6989)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) 
-
 (cid:7289)?
) i) - (-  )  
    (cid:7021)   (cid:6994) (cid:7298)  
(cid:7408)    (cid:7289)
ii)  (cid:7407)  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)     
(cid:7408)   ?(cid:7289)
(cid:6981)  
  
 
   
(cid:7021)   
-  (cid:6981)  
(cid:7008)  ((cid:7016)  (cid:7286))
iii) (cid:6989)    -  
-    (cid:7021) (cid:7312)    
     , (cid:7021)  (cid:7286),  (cid:7286) 
    (cid:7004)  (cid:7272)   (cid:7277) ?
 (cid:7277)
-
) (cid:6989)    -   -  (cid:7277)
 (cid:6994) (cid:7298)  (cid:6981)  ? ((cid:6989)    (cid:7286)  -
  (cid:7409)   (cid:7289))
.) (cid:6989)     (cid:7407) (cid:7263)     
  (cid:7079)    ?
) (cid:6989)    / (cid:7263)(cid:7306)  (cid:7289)  (cid:7013) (cid:7286)
  (cid:7408) ?
i)     -  
-/ -/(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)   
 
 (cid:7277)
ii) (cid:6981)  -   -
/ -/(cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)    
(cid:7408)  
 (cid:7277)
iii)  (cid:7061)-(cid:7019) /(cid:7408)(cid:7076),    
    (cid:7007)  (cid:7408)   
 (cid:7277)
iv) (cid:6989)    (cid:7408)    (cid:7079)
 (cid:7018) (cid:6981) (cid:7408) ?*

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
144 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
*(cid:7408) (cid:7004)  “” (cid:7286) ,     
(cid:7004)   (cid:7408)     (cid:6979)   (cid:7277)
(cid:7021)        (cid:7408)(cid:7004)   
-  (cid:7408)  
**     (cid:7079)  (cid:7298) 
(cid:7298)  (cid:7271)(cid:7373) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)  
(cid:6981) (cid:7409)  
***(cid:6989)   (cid:7079)  (cid:7018)    
   (cid:7408)   ?    
    (cid:6979)  (cid:7272)  
   (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  
) (cid:6989)     (cid:7407)   (cid:6981)    (cid:7277)
(, (cid:7074)(cid:7298),   (cid:7367))  (cid:7016)  (cid:7286)
) (cid:6989)   -   -  (cid:7277)
(cid:7367) (cid:7408)     ?
) (cid:6989)        (cid:7409)    (cid:7408)  (cid:7277)
    (cid:7289)?
) (cid:6989)       ?  (cid:7277)
) (cid:6989)  -   -  
(cid:6994) (cid:7298)        ?  (cid:7277)
5.-   -   
) (cid:7407) (cid:7286)   (cid:7018)  ((cid:7004)  )   (cid:7286) -  (cid:7079)(cid:7008)    

 (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)

)   (cid:7407)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)       (cid:7286)  (cid:7079)(cid:7008)    
 (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)

)       ?(cid:7289)   
,  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 145
  
(cid:7008)   ((cid:7016)  (cid:7286))
) (cid:7018)  (cid:7409) (cid:6989)    (cid:7289) (cid:7410)    (cid:7289)    
  (cid:7272) (cid:7286)    ?(cid:7289)
  
(cid:6981)
(cid:7059)
(cid:7018) (cid:6989)   
 (cid:7008) 
.) (cid:6989)       (cid:6994) (cid:7298)     ?(cid:7289)  (cid:7277)
  (cid:7286) -
)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7312) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   (cid:7286) 
i)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6994)     
ii) (cid:7408)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:6994)  (cid:7277)   , (cid:6989)   )     (cid:7277)
) (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7298)     
 (cid:7277)
iii) (cid:6989)    (cid:6979)  (cid:7409) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)   (cid:7289)?  (cid:7277)
-
) (cid:6989)  -   -  (cid:7409)   (cid:6981)   (cid:7277)
  (cid:6981)  (cid:7289)?
-
)  -   -  (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7079)(cid:7008)   (cid:6981) (cid:7021) 
(cid:7021) /(cid:7021)   (cid:6981) ? 
(cid:6981) (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)
(cid:7079)(cid:7008)  
(cid:6981) (cid:7021)    
  (cid:7059) (cid:7018) 
(cid:7408)
) (cid:6989)  -   -    (cid:6981)   (cid:7277)
 (cid:7286)  (cid:7289)?
) (cid:7298), (cid:7021)   (cid:7021) (cid:7298)  (cid:6979)(cid:7298)       (cid:6994)    
  (cid:7286) 
 
)    (cid:7409) (cid:6989)   ? ( )

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
146 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
) (cid:6989)      (cid:7407)   (cid:6981)  ?  (cid:7277)
(,(cid:7074)(cid:7298), (cid:7082)  (cid:7367))  (cid:7016)  (cid:7286)  -
)    (cid:7289)     (cid:7272) (cid:7286)    
?
6. -   -    (cid:6994) (cid:7298)    :
)  (cid:6981)        (cid:7289)  

  
(cid:7021)  
 (cid:6981)  
) (cid:6989)    (cid:7286)        (cid:7289)? (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7277)
(cid:7408) , (cid:7408) (cid:7374)(cid:7298)         (cid:7289)  (cid:7286)  -
)      (cid:7289)   -    (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7008) 
(cid:7009) ,     (cid:7408) (cid:7289)?
(cid:7079)(cid:7008) 
(cid:7021) 
(cid:7020) (cid:6981)
7. (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)(cid:7298)    :
) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) (cid:7020)    (cid:7286)  (     (cid:6994) 
(cid:7408)    (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   (cid:7079) (cid:6981)   (cid:7004)  (cid:7286))



) (cid:6979) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)  : (cid:7408)    -   (cid:7079)(cid:7008)    
-       
 (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)


--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 147
) (cid:6989)  -   -  (cid:6979) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7277)
  (cid:7289)?
-
) (cid:6989)    (cid:7409)  (cid:7286) (cid:7272)  ?(cid:7289) ((cid:7409)   (cid:7277)
(cid:7011) , (cid:6979)(cid:7298)  (cid:7407)(cid:7298)    (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) 
)
.) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7018)    (cid:7286) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)  ((cid:6979)(cid:7298), (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)(cid:7008)    
  )  (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) (cid:7286)

) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)    (cid:7410)  (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7011)   (cid:7286)
8. (cid:7008)  -    :
) (cid:6989)  (cid:7008)  -      (cid:6981)     (cid:7277)
(  , (cid:7074)(cid:7298)  (cid:7298)  (cid:7367))? (cid:7408)  ?
-
) (cid:6989)     (cid:7079)(cid:7008)  ?  (cid:7277)
   

) (cid:6989)     (cid:6979)     (cid:6981)(cid:7312)/  (cid:7277)
(cid:7298)/(cid:7407)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7374)  ?
) (cid:6989)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7298)   (cid:7286) -   (cid:7407)   (cid:7277)
   (cid:7263) ?
-
.)    (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7407) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7407) (cid:6994)    
   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)
 (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)  
(cid:7407) (cid:6994)   
   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)
 (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7277)
 
(cid:7407)   
(cid:7079)(cid:7009)    (cid:6994) 
 
) -  (cid:6981)(cid:7312)     (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     (cid:7008) (cid:7286)
   (cid:7286)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)      (cid:7079)(cid:7009) 
 (cid:7277)
(cid:7263)  ((cid:7408) ,  (cid:7011)  )(cid:7286)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
148 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
9. (cid:7298)   
)  (cid:7367) (cid:7408)   -    (cid:7286)   
) -   (cid:7407)    (cid:7079) (cid:7004)   (cid:7018)  (cid:7004)   (cid:7079)(cid:7008)
  (cid:7286) 
 (cid:7004) 
(cid:7004)  (cid:7004)
   (cid:7079)
(cid:7018) (cid:6981)
) (cid:7407)  (cid:7021) (cid:7298)         
    (cid:7374)    ( (cid:7408) ,  (cid:7011)  )(cid:7286)
 (cid:7277)
(cid:7367) 
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 36
[ 24(5)]
(cid:7079)  (cid:7021)   
(cid:7088)………………….. / (cid:7088)…………………/(cid:7409) (cid:7074)  (cid:7074) …………………… 
(cid:6979)/(cid:7021) (cid:7021) (cid:7005) //(cid:7008)  (cid:7004)  (cid:7272)(cid:7298) ………………. ( (cid:7416)(cid:7020)  (cid:7286))   (cid:7079)  (cid:7409) (cid:7272) 
  (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:6981)(cid:7407) (cid:7408)       (cid:6979)   (cid:7375) (cid:6989)   
……………………((cid:7408)(cid:7298)/) (cid:7409)      (cid:7409) (cid:7079)   (cid:7272) (cid:7286) ……………(cid:7271) (cid:7079) /
………….(cid:7271) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)    (cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:6981)     (cid:6989)  (cid:7079)     
..........................  (cid:7289)    .................................. (cid:7408) ,   (cid:7408)  
 (cid:7008) /(cid:6990)  (cid:7021) (cid:7069), (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/(cid:7021) ,  (cid:7016)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 37
[ 25(2)]
(cid:7004) (cid:7278)     (cid:6981)  
............................................................................(  ) (cid:7074)/(cid:7074) (cid:7088)
...................................................................., (cid:7408) ..................... ......................(cid:6981) (cid:7409)     (cid:6981)
 (cid:6981)   (cid:7271) .......................... ...........................................((cid:7374)(cid:7019) /(cid:7079))   (cid:7004) (cid:7278)   
 ,…………………………………………………… (  )  (cid:6981) (cid:7408)     (cid:7079)  
(cid:7408)   (cid:7289) (cid:7408)  / (cid:7409)       (cid:6981)  (cid:6981)(cid:7013)    (cid:6981)   (cid:7079)
  /     21 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7286) :      , (cid:7079)
(cid:7408)   (cid:7079), /(cid:7408)/(cid:7408) (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7409) (cid:7373)(cid:6981) (cid:7414) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7016)    

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 149
(cid:6996) /       (cid:7408)   (cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:7334) (cid:7409), ...........................((cid:7408)/)      
(cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7079)   (cid:7019)  (cid:7278) (cid:7300)  , .............................................(cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7018) (cid:7334)   (cid:7289) (cid:7286)   
 (cid:7008) /(cid:6990)  (cid:7021) , (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)/
(cid:7007) (cid:6979)/(cid:7021) ,  (cid:7016)  
(cid:7079): (cid:6996) /  (cid:6979)   (cid:6996)     
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 38
[ 27(2)]
  -         
1. (cid:7021) //  (cid:7011)      (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     
1. (cid:7021) //  
1. (cid:7079)   (cid:6981) (cid:7021) / (cid:7409)  (cid:6990)    (cid:7409) 
(  (cid:7079) (cid:7021) , ,   (cid:6980) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286))
1.  /(cid:7021) /   
1.  /  (cid:7013) 
1..  /(cid:6989)  (cid:7013) 
1. -  
1. (cid:6989)     (cid:7021)   , (cid:7408)   (cid:7008)  (cid:6996) (cid:7298) (cid:7286)  (cid:7312)    (cid:7286)
1. (cid:6989)     (cid:7008)    (cid:7021)   (cid:7408)  ? (cid:7408) 
I.   (cid:6981) (cid:7013)   (cid:7021) (cid:7272) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)     
II. (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
III. (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)  (cid:7409) 
IV. (cid:7008)  (cid:7021)    
2. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)     (cid:7011)  :
2. (cid:7079)(cid:7021)      /(cid:7021) 
2.  /  (cid:7013) 
2.  /(cid:6989)  (cid:7013) 
2. -
3. (cid:6981) (  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)      ):
3. (cid:6990)  
3. -(cid:7021) (cid:7003) 
3.  (cid:7021) 
3.  (cid:7008)  
4.  :
4. (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (   (cid:7016)  (cid:7286))
4. (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (   (cid:7016)  (cid:7286))
4.  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (   (cid:7016)  (cid:7286))

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
150 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
4.  (cid:6979)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) 
4..   (cid:7011)  (cid:7410)(cid:7079) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286) (  (cid:7079) (cid:6989) )
4. (cid:7079)(cid:7004)  (cid:7312)     (cid:7018) (cid:7021) , (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079)   (cid:7016)  (cid:7408)
 :
I. 
II. 
III.  (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 
4.  (cid:7409) (cid:7018) (cid:7021)   (cid:7021) (cid:7021)(cid:7005)  (cid:7411) ()   (cid:7079) (cid:7074)  (cid:6991)
(cid:7286)
4. -  (cid:7021) (cid:6994)      (cid:7018) (cid:7021)  :
I.(cid:7409) (cid:7074)
II. (cid:7021) 
III.(cid:7003)  (cid:6979)(cid:7074)
IV. (cid:7008)  (cid:7018) (cid:7021) 
4. (cid:7408) / (cid:6979) (   ) ((cid:7408)  (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:6991) 
(cid:7286))
5.   (cid:7409) (cid:6979)
6. (cid:7011)   ( (cid:7079)  (cid:6981) (cid:7286)      (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)    )
6.  (cid:7008)      (cid:7061)   (cid:7079) 
7. (cid:6981)
7. (cid:6981)(cid:7407)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7021)  
7.    
8.  (cid:7409) (cid:7020) 
8.   (cid:7300)     (cid:7004) (cid:6981) (cid:6981)
8. (cid:6991)  (cid:7079)(cid:7271) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) /   (cid:7021) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7378)  ((cid:7414)  
 (cid:7016) (cid:6991) (cid:7286))
8.  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7004) (cid:7298)/ (cid:7409) 
8. (cid:7408)     () , 1976  (cid:6981)   
(  (cid:7079) (cid:7074) (cid:6991) (cid:7286))
8..   (cid:7300)   (cid:7079)(cid:7009)      (cid:7011)  ((cid:7079)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6991)
(cid:7286))
8. (cid:7021) (cid:7409)/(cid:7407)  , (cid:7079),  (cid:7408) (-)     
  (cid:7008)  (cid:7090)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  ((cid:7408)  )
8.  ,  (cid:6990)  (cid:6981) (cid:7263)    (cid:7289)   (cid:7011) 
8. (cid:6989)   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)       (cid:7289)       
8.   (cid:7300)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079) (cid:6991)  (cid:7286) :
I.  (cid:6979)(cid:7407)(cid:6981)
II.   (cid:7018)  
III. (cid:7079)(cid:7009)    
IV.    (cid:7074)
(cid:7289) (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979))
, 2016    (cid:7289)    (cid:7289)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 151
………………………………..(/(cid:7021)   )  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) ,
2015  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2016  (cid:6981)    (cid:7272) (cid:7286) (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)   
 (cid:6979)(cid:7312)      
(cid:7289)  / (cid:7264) (cid:7408)   (cid:7373)   (cid:7018) (cid:6989)   (cid:7373) (cid:7277) (cid:7408)     (cid:7018)  (cid:6981) 
(cid:7408) (cid:6981) (cid:7286)   (cid:7088)(cid:7298)   (cid:7286)    (cid:7407)(cid:7074)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7286) (cid:7009)      (cid:7408)  
(cid:7408)   (cid:7286)(cid:7076)  (cid:6996)   (cid:7367)   (cid:7286) (cid:7277)    
(cid:7289) (cid:7286)(cid:7076)/(cid:6996)  , , (cid:7408)(cid:7287) (cid:7298)    (cid:7286)  (cid:7312) (cid:7367) (cid:6981)(cid:7407)  (cid:7300)  
     (cid:7264) 
(cid:7289) -  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)     
  (cid:7264) 
(cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:6979)(cid:6981)  (cid:7021) (cid:6979) : ……………………………
 :
 :
 :
 :
 :
(cid:6981)  :
(cid:7021) (cid:6979) :
 . 1: …………………………….
 . 2: ………………………………
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 39
[ 27(4)]
  -    (cid:6989)   (cid:7409) (cid:7008)   (cid:7079) (cid:7074)
(cid:7021)  (cid:7298)        ……. (cid:7021)   (cid:6979)    ........................ ((cid:7021)   
)  ….....   ….....(cid:6981)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)     (cid:6979)) , 2015   (cid:6981) (cid:6989) 
   (cid:7272)  (cid:7286)(cid:7008)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   
(cid:6989)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015  (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  ((cid:7298) (cid:7409)  
 (cid:6979)) , 2016  (cid:6989)   (cid:7367) -  (cid:7271) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298)     
(cid:7007)  
(cid:6989)   (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)   (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) -  (cid:7407) (cid:7408)   (cid:7298)  
   (cid:7007)  
……………………
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
()
……………………
((cid:7021) (cid:6979))
(cid:7007) (cid:6979),  (cid:7016)  / (cid:7079) (cid:7021) (cid:7069), (cid:7408) (cid:7008)  (cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
152 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 40
[ 61(3)(xii)]
(cid:6981)       (cid:7021)  (cid:7367) (cid:7009)    (cid:7079)(cid:7021)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7298) (cid:7409) 
   (cid:7021)   (cid:7011)  :
(cid:7059)..    (cid:7079)(cid:7409)//     (cid:7409) 
(cid:6990) 
(cid:7009)    (cid:7278) (cid:7408)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6990)  ……………………………………...
(cid:7009)      (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6990) ……………………………………
……………………………………… (cid:7021)  (cid:7286) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:6990) 
(cid:7021) (cid:6979)
   (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7018) (cid:6989) 

(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 41
[ 69 () (1)]
 (cid:6979) (cid:6979) (cid:6981)
1.    :
2.  (cid:7409) :
3.    :
4.    :
5. -/  
6. /(cid:7021) (cid:7367) (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7409)  :
7.   (cid:7079)(cid:7021)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334)    (cid:6981) (cid:7011) :
8.  (cid:7409)  :
 (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408)    (cid:7408)     (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7334)     (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7286) 
.. , 2015   (cid:6979) (cid:6979)      (cid:7286) (cid:7286)
  .............   (cid:7286)
 (cid:7409)   ...............
((cid:7021)(cid:6979))
(cid:7079) (cid:7008) / (cid:7021),
(cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 153
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 42
[ 69 () (4)]
   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)
................... (  )  .............     ................. ((cid:7021)  ) (cid:7286)   (cid:6979) (cid:7079)
(cid:7409) (cid:7272)     
(cid:7334)   ................ ( (cid:7016)  , ..............  (cid:7021) ................)  (cid:7367)  (cid:7408) 
   (cid:6979) (cid:7079) (cid:7286)    (cid:6979)   (cid:7409) (cid:7008)  (cid:7021),  (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7367)
  (cid:7408)  , (cid:7414) (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)     
(cid:7334)   ................  (cid:7021) (cid:7286)       (cid:6979)(cid:7074)   (cid:7016)    
(cid:7408) ...............  ( )     (cid:6981) (cid:7408) 
 (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7021)(cid:7312) (cid:7409)   (cid:7409)    (cid:7388) (cid:7021) ................ ((cid:7408)  )  
(cid:7016)    (cid:7301)   (cid:7289)
   (cid:7016)       (cid:6979) (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:6981)  (cid:7286)     
   (cid:7008) (cid:7003)/ (cid:7016)   (cid:6979) (cid:7021)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7367) (cid:7062)  (cid:7408) .
(cid:7079):
1.  (cid:7016)  
2. (cid:6981) / 
3. (cid:7021)  (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)
  ____________  __________ 20
((cid:7021)(cid:6979)) ((cid:7021)(cid:6979))
(cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7016)   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
154 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 43
[ 69 () (3)]
  
(   (cid:7021)    )
 (cid:7378)
 (cid:7021)  (cid:7286)
/(cid:7079)  ………………….
   ………………….
.  (cid:6989)  (cid:7011) 
•
 …………………………………………………………………………………
•
(cid:7271)/ ((cid:7334) (cid:7088)  (cid:7008) (cid:7408) (cid:7286)) ……………………………
•
(cid:7278)    ................
•
(cid:6981)  ...............
•
(cid:7088) (     (cid:7008) (cid:7408) (cid:7286)) :
I.(cid:7407)   (cid:7263)
II.(cid:7407)(cid:7390)(cid:7334)/
III.  (cid:7410)   ((cid:7011) )(cid:7286)
IV. 
V.(cid:7008) 
•
(cid:6981)
I.(cid:7008) ((cid:7008) /. ./. ./. . .)
II.(cid:7021)//(cid:7008) ( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
•
 /(cid:6996)
•
  
I. (cid:7059)(cid:7409) /(cid:7340) 
II.   (cid:6979)/   (cid:6979)/   (cid:6979)    (cid:7277)
III. (cid:7021)  /(cid:7408) 
•
(cid:7408)  (cid:7408) (cid:7367)  (cid:7016) / (cid:7008) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)   (     (cid:7008)
)
I. -(cid:7021) /    /  (cid:7016)  / / 

II. (cid:7407)(cid:6979) 
III.  (cid:7016) 
IV.  (cid:6981)(cid:6981)
V. /(cid:6979) (  )
VI. (cid:7008)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 155
VII. (cid:7008)  (cid:7004) (cid:7407)
VIII. (cid:7021) (cid:7408)/(cid:7408)
•
(cid:7407)   
I.-// - (cid:7367) (cid:7390) (cid:6981)
II. (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)
III.   (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)
IV.- (cid:7409) (cid:6979)
V.-   (cid:7390)
VI.-    
VII.- (cid:7409) (cid:7004) 
VIII.
IX.(cid:7008) ( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
•
   (cid:7263) (cid:7011)  (cid:7021)(cid:7272)
I.  (cid:7390) (cid:6981) - -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
II. (cid:7407) (cid:7079)
III.   -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
IV. (cid:7008) - -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
•
   (cid:7263) (cid:7390) (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)(cid:7272).
I.     - -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
II. (cid:7059) (cid:6981) - - -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
III.  (cid:7061)(cid:7021)   - -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
IV.   - -/-/(cid:7334)/(cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
V. (cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
•
 (cid:7367)  (cid:7408)  
I.  (cid:7408)   (cid:7004) (cid:6981) 
II.        -(cid:7074) (cid:7409)  
III. (cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
•
(cid:7278)     (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)
i) (cid:7393)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
ii) (cid:7088)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
iii) (cid:7298)   -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
iv) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
v) (cid:7265)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
vi) (cid:7004)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
vii)  (cid:7059)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
viii) (cid:7074)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
ix)   -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
156 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
x) (cid:7407)  -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
xi) (cid:7074) (cid:7059) -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
xii) (cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286)) -  /(cid:6980) (cid:7277)/(cid:7277)  
15. (cid:7278)    (cid:7408)   :
I. - – //(cid:7298)
II. -/-  
III.  - 
IV. (cid:7074) – 
V.  
VI.  
VII. /(cid:7021)/(cid:7088)
VIII. (cid:7008)( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286))
16.       -  
(cid:7021) (cid:7286)    – / / / (cid:7277)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7278)     - / / / (cid:7277)
17.    -   
(cid:7021) (cid:7286)    – / /  /(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)/(cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298)   /  
 / (cid:7277)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7278)     - / / /(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)/(cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298)   / 
  / (cid:7277)
18. -   (cid:7074)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286)    – / //(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)/(cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298)   /   
/ (cid:7277)
(cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7278)     - / //(cid:7004)  (cid:7408)(cid:7298) (cid:7286)/(cid:7414)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7407)(cid:7349)(cid:7298)   /    
/ (cid:7277)
19.   (cid:7011)
20 (cid:7407)  (cid:7021)(cid:7272) : (cid:7407)/(cid:7334) (cid:7407)//(cid:7407)/ -
21. (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7021)(cid:7298)   
I.    (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
II.    (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
III.    (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
IV.     (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 157
V.     (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
VI.     (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
VII.    (cid:7298) (cid:7401)(cid:6981)/(cid:7401)(cid:6981)/ (cid:7277)
22. (cid:7407)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7367) (cid:7408) , (cid:7408)  (cid:7298),  (cid:7011)
(cid:7059)..    (cid:7409) (cid:7010) (cid:7010) (cid:7408)  
 (cid:7021)(cid:7272)  (cid:7021) ,(cid:7408) (cid:7409) 
 (cid:7263)
(cid:7298)
1. 
2.  
3. 
4.  
5. 
()
()
()
()
6. 
()
()
()
()
7. 
(cid:7008) (//-
8. )
23.(cid:7407) (cid:7409)  (cid:7407)(cid:7013)(cid:7275):
I. -(cid:7013)(cid:7275) ( (cid:6979)(cid:7074) )
II.   – /(cid:7289)/ l
III.  –  / //,, , (cid:7069), )
IV. (cid:7008) ( (cid:7016) (cid:7286))

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
158 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
24. (cid:7407)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)  (cid:7021):
i) - (cid:7013)/ 
ii)  (cid:7013)/ 
iii)  (cid:7013)/ 
25 (cid:7407)  (cid:7021)(cid:7298)   (cid:6981) :
I.   (cid:7414) (cid:7300) (cid:7286)  
II. (cid:7021) (cid:7300) (cid:7286)  
III.  (cid:7309) (cid:7414) (cid:7300) (cid:7286)   
IV.  (cid:7277)
26. (cid:7278)   (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7298) (cid:7367)  :
I.  (cid:6979)
II. (cid:7401)(cid:6981)
III. (cid:7397)
IV. (cid:7021)
V. (cid:7397)
VI. 
(cid:7408)(cid:7021) (cid:7011) (12 (cid:6981)  18  (cid:6981) )
27.   (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7263)?
28.  (cid:7079)  (cid:7011), (cid:7408)  
I. -
II.  
III.  
IV.  
V.  
VI.  
VII. (cid:7008)  
VIII. (cid:7334) (cid:7286)   (cid:7277)
IX. (cid:7008) ( (cid:7016) (cid:7286))
29.  (cid:7079)  
I. - (cid:7409) (cid:6979)
II. - (cid:7409) (cid:7272)   (cid:6979)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 159
III. -   (cid:7390)
IV. -  (cid:7004) (cid:7079)
V.   (cid:6981)  (cid:7079) – (cid:7071)/ 
VI. (cid:7008) ( (cid:7016) (cid:7286))
30. (cid:7286)
 
i) (cid:7077) i) /(cid:7408)(cid:7016)  
ii) (cid:7408) ii) (cid:7407)/  
iii) (cid:7071)  iii) (cid:7021)(cid:7286) 
iv)   iv) (cid:7414) (cid:6981)
v)   v) (cid:7071)/(cid:7286)(cid:7411)/-
vi) (cid:7008)  vi) (cid:7008) 
 (cid:7011)
31.    (cid:7286) (cid:7079)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7011)
(cid:7059)   (cid:7011)    (cid:7079)(cid:7385)  
i) 
ii)  
iii) 
iv)  (cid:7286) (cid:6981)
v)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7286) (cid:6981)
vi) (cid:7298) (cid:7409) 
vii)  (cid:6981)
viii) (cid:7008) ((cid:7016) (cid:7286))
    (cid:7011):
32. (cid:7407)(cid:7407) (cid:7272)(cid:7298)      
I. (cid:7407) (cid:7061)  
II.    
III. (cid:7019)  
IV.   

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
160 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
V. (cid:7071)  
VI. (cid:7083)  
VII. 
33.   (cid:7011)
I. (cid:7334)  
II. (cid:7021)(cid:7298)  
III. (cid:7289)/
IV. (cid:7008) ((cid:7016) (cid:7286))
34. -   (cid:7409) 
I. :   
II. :      
III.    
 (cid:6979) (cid:7011)
35.   (cid:7286) (cid:7079)  (cid:6981)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979)  (cid:7011)
I. 
II. (cid:7277) (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
III. (cid:7277)   (cid:7412) (cid:7277)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
IV. (cid:7277)   (cid:7412) (cid:7277)   (cid:6979)  (cid:7007) 
V. (cid:7277)    
36. (cid:7378)   
I.  (cid:7007)    (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7275)(cid:6981)
II. (cid:7378)  (cid:6981) (cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7272) (cid:7409) 
III. (cid:7007)(cid:7298)   (cid:7390)
IV.     (cid:7408)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079)
V. (cid:7407)     
VI.   (cid:7409)  (cid:7004)
VII. (cid:7378)  (cid:6990) 
VIII. (cid:7378)      
IX.      (cid:7334) (cid:7021)  
X. (cid:7008) ( (cid:7016) (cid:7286) )
37.  (cid:7378) (cid:7286)   (cid:7007)  (cid:7408) (cid:7409)  (cid:7378)  (cid:7011)
I.  / /

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 161
II.  / (cid:7016) (cid:7378) /  (cid:7016)
III.  (cid:7079)
38. (cid:6979)  (cid:7007):(cid:7410) /(cid:7061) / (cid:6981)/ / /(cid:7383) / / / / /(cid:7008)  ( (cid:7016) (cid:7286))
39.   (cid:7286) (cid:7278)    (cid:7079) (cid:7409)    (cid:7409)   (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:6979)
(cid:7300) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  (cid:7409) (cid:6979) /(cid:6981)(cid:6981)
40. - (cid:7286) (cid:7278) (cid:7409)     (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
(cid:7300) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)
(cid:7390) (cid:7353)(cid:7059)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7079)
(cid:7079)  (cid:7011)?
41. - (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     (cid:7407)(cid:7334) (cid:6979) (cid:6981) 
i) (cid:7021)
I.   (  (cid:7016) (cid:7286) )
II. (cid:7407)(cid:6989) (  (cid:7016) (cid:7286) )
III. (cid:7071)(cid:7306)
IV. (cid:7286)(cid:7411)
V. (cid:7008) (  (cid:7016) (cid:7286) )
(cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:6981)
42. (cid:7278)      :
43. (cid:7407) (cid:7021):
44.   (cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:6981):
45. - /(cid:6979)  (cid:7408)(cid:7004)  :
46.  (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:6981) (cid:7021):
(cid:7059) (cid:7414) (cid:7407)(cid:7009)         
.
(cid:7304) (cid:7409) 


(cid:7079)  



--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
162 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
//

47.     (cid:6981)
, ,  (cid:6981)  (cid:7021)(cid:6981)  (cid:7021)(cid:7004) 
 
48.   (cid:7286) (cid:7278)  (cid:6981) (cid:7074) (cid:7003)  (cid:7011) :
I. 
II. (cid:7021)   (cid:7074)
III. 
IV. (cid:7008)  (  (cid:7286))
49.   (cid:7334) (cid:7074) (cid:7289)
I. (cid:6979)
II. (cid:6979)
III.   
IV. (cid:7008)   (cid:7286)
V.  (cid:7286) 
VI.   (cid:7410)
VII. (cid:7407) (cid:7410)
50.  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)   ( (cid:7021) (cid:7020)  )
I.  (cid:7079) (cid:7298)  
II. (cid:7414)   (cid:7006)(cid:7007)
III.      (cid:7013)(cid:7006)(cid:7007)
IV.   (cid:7006)(cid:7007)
V. (cid:7021)(cid:6994)     (cid:7006)(cid:7007)
VI. (cid:7008) (  (cid:7016) (cid:7286))
51. / (cid:7286)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) 
I. 
II. (cid:7367) (cid:7021)   
III. (cid:7007)  (cid:7021)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 163
IV. (cid:7008)  (cid:7021) 
52.  (cid:7409) (cid:7021)    (cid:7374)(cid:7019)  :
I.  (cid:6981)  
II. (cid:7088)    
III.    (cid:6981) 
IV. (cid:7082)(cid:7020)  (cid:6981)(cid:7298)  
V. (cid:7008)  ( (cid:7021) (cid:7020)  (cid:7286))
53. /  (cid:7018) 
I.   (cid:7298)    (cid:7298)  
II.  (cid:7298) (cid:7409)   (cid:7286) (cid:7272)
III. (cid:7298)  (cid:7016) (cid:7286) (cid:7272)
54.   (cid:7021)(cid:7298)    (cid:7021)
I.    (cid:7021) 
II. (cid:7021) (cid:7008)    
III.   (cid:7021) (cid:7277)
IV.   (cid:7021)   (cid:7272)  (cid:7408)   
55.    (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)     (cid:7407)    /(cid:7263)
I. (cid:7004)
II. (cid:7004)
III. (cid:7390) (cid:6981)
IV.  
V. 
56.   (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059)
I. (cid:7083)
II. (cid:6990)
III. (cid:7059)   (cid:6981)(cid:6981)
IV.  (cid:7334)
V.  (cid:6981)
57.   (cid:7079)    (cid:7272) ………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
164 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
  
I. (cid:6979)
II. 
III.  (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
IV.  (cid:6981)
V. (cid:7008)
     (cid:7016)  / (cid:7407)(cid:6979)       (cid:7079) (cid:7079)(cid:7408)(cid:7059) .
 (cid:7016)  / (cid:7407)(cid:6979)  /  (cid:6981)(cid:6981) /  (cid:6981)(cid:7275)(cid:6981) (cid:7367) (cid:6981)
(cid:7079)  (cid:7367)   (cid:7409)  (cid:6979)
(cid:7079) /  (cid:7016)  / (cid:7407)(cid:6979) 
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 44
{ 82 (1)}
(cid:6989)(cid:6981)    :(cid:7021) 
/  ........................... .(cid:7074)/(cid:7074)(cid:7088)......................... .................... . (cid:7079) ./(cid:7079)
. .................................  (cid:7408) (cid:7008) ( (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (cid:7409)     (cid:7008) (cid:6981)
/ (cid:7008)/ (cid:7016)  ................................ (cid:7367) (cid:7408) .........................  ........................ (cid:7409)  
 (cid:7079) /(cid:6979) (cid:7021)/ /   (cid:7286)     (cid:7408)     ................................ (cid:7021) (cid:7286)
.....................(cid:7021)  ,   (cid:7408)   (cid:7289)(cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)     .......................................   
(cid:7334)..................(cid:7021)  (cid:6981)(cid:6979) (cid:7079)  (cid:7334) (cid:7408) .
    (cid:7414) (cid:7298)   (cid:7408)     (cid:7408)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7016) (cid:7408)     
   .
 :
(cid:7021)(cid:6979)
(cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981) / (cid:7008) / (cid:7016) 
(cid:7021):
 (cid:7288):
1. (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7390)(cid:7334) .............  (cid:7079)(cid:7021)      (cid:7334)  (cid:7079)  (cid:7286)  /  /(cid:6979) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)
 (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7385)   ................... (cid:6981)(cid:6979)  (cid:7079) (cid:7286)       (cid:7409) 
(cid:7062)   (cid:7021) (cid:7277)  (cid:7408)  .
2. .......................... (cid:7409)     (cid:7021) (cid:7008) (cid:7408) (cid:7021) ,  ...................... (cid:7334)  (cid:7367)   
,(cid:7021)   (cid:7277) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 165
3.     (cid:7378) / (cid:7408) (cid:6981) /(cid:7018)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7021)   (cid:7286)  (cid:7008) (cid:7079) 
(cid:7334)...................................... (cid:7079)(cid:7385) (cid:7263)     .
4.  (cid:7408)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7277)   ............................. (cid:7409) (cid:7397)  (cid:7272)    (cid:7410) .
6. (cid:7334) (cid:7408) (cid:6981)     (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:7286)  (cid:7367) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7021) (cid:7286) (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7409) (cid:7409) (cid:7409) (cid:7334) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)
     (cid:7021) (cid:7408)     (cid:7408) (cid:7008) ( (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)) , 2015 (cid:7409)  97 
 (cid:6981) (cid:7409) 
(cid:7289)  (cid:7367) (cid:7021)   (cid:7264) (cid:7408) (cid:7289) (cid:7334) (cid:7300)   (cid:7264)   (cid:7304)      (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7408)    (cid:7289) 
(cid:7021)  (cid:7264).
(cid:7334)(cid:6981)   (cid:7021)(cid:6979) / (cid:7008)
(cid:7079) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:7334)  (cid:7286) (cid:7416)(cid:7397) (cid:7288) ................................... (    )    (cid:7306)  (cid:7021)(cid:7397)
(cid:7409) (cid:7306)  (cid:7408)   (cid:7300)  (cid:7021) /     /(cid:7409) (cid:6981)(cid:6989)  (cid:7008)   .
(cid:7006) (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   (cid:7408) (cid:7334) ..................... (cid:6981)(cid:7334)  (cid:7408)  .
(cid:7079)   (cid:7079) (cid:6981) (cid:7021)   (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)
 (cid:7021)(cid:6979)  
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 45
{  82 (4) }
(cid:6981) (cid:6979) 
(cid:7079) (cid:6990)
………………………………./    (cid:7286)
  ............ (cid:6981) (cid:7409) 
/   -  .................... (cid:7021)   (cid:7409)  .
    / (cid:7008) (cid:7079)(cid:7385)    (cid:7409)  - (cid:7286) ...........................(cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7286) (cid:7286).
(cid:7334) (cid:7414)    (cid:7008) (cid:7021)  (cid:7340) (cid:7367) (cid:6981) ,  (cid:7334) /     (cid:7409)
 (cid:7298) (cid:7409)    (cid:7301) ,        (cid:7409)  (cid:7277)      (cid:7409)   
  (cid:7412)        (cid:6994) (cid:7277) (cid:7298)     (cid:7334)    , (cid:6979) (cid:7021), (cid:7079)  
(cid:7079) ..................................... (cid:7409) (cid:6979) (cid:7286)    (cid:7334)         
(cid:7016)  /(cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981)  (cid:6979)  (cid:7408) .
(cid:7278) (cid:6979)   (cid:7334) /   , (cid:6979) (cid:7021), (cid:7079) , ..........................  (cid:6981)  (cid:7286)
 . (cid:6996) /  (cid:6979)      (cid:7008)  (cid:7079)(cid:7009)     / (cid:7016)   (cid:7367) 
   (cid:7409)      15 (cid:7408) (cid:7286) (cid:7062)  (cid:7019) (cid:7390)(cid:7021)   (cid:7334) /    (cid:7299)(cid:7334)
 (cid:7021)   .

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
166 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
 (cid:7408) ..................  .............. 20
(cid:7007)(cid:6979) / (cid:7006)(cid:7021)
 (cid:7016) 
(cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981)
(cid:7079):
1. (cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334),    (cid:7021)
2.   (cid:6979)      (cid:7016) 
........... (cid:7008)...................   (cid:7079) .
(cid:7079)(cid:7272) 46
[ 41(3)  41(9)]
(cid:6979)  (cid:7367) (cid:6979)
(    (cid:7286))
 (cid:7409)  ……………………….    …………………………
  (cid:6979)   (cid:7407)(cid:7298)  :
1. ……………………………..
2. ……………………………
3. ……………………………
. (cid:7008)  :
I.     :
................................................................................................................................................................
...........................................................
II.   ((cid:7408) (cid:7008) ,2015  ): ……………………….
i.   (cid:7409) : …………………………………………………………………..
ii. (cid:7385) (cid:7409) : .................................................................................
III. . .    :
…………………………………………….................................................................................................................
................
i. ………………………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 167
IV. /(cid:7079) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  : …………………………………………………………………………
V. (cid:7013)(cid:6981)  ………………………….   ………………………………………………..
………………………………………...........
vi.   (cid:7021)(cid:7272) ( (cid:7008) (cid:7408) (cid:7286)):
(cid:7079) / /(cid:6979) (cid:7021)/ /(cid:6989)  (cid:7088) ( (cid:7021)(cid:7397) (cid:7286)):
vii (cid:7408) (cid:6996)    (cid:7079)(cid:7385)/  (cid:7079)(cid:7385)      
viii (cid:7408)  (cid:7367)   :
.   (cid:7409) (cid:7021)
(i)  (cid:7409) (cid:7021) (cid:6979) ………………………….
(ii ) (cid:6989) 10 (cid:6981)     / (cid:7298)     (cid:7286)    
 (cid:7277)
(cid:7408)    (cid:7409)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ………………….
( iii) (cid:6989) 05  10 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    / (cid:7298)     (cid:7409) -     
 (cid:7277)
(iv) (cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)   (cid:7286) -   (cid:7289)?
I. 7-11 (cid:6981):
II. 12-18 (cid:6981)
III. (cid:6989)  0-5 (cid:6981) (cid:7409)    (cid:7340) (cid:7289)?   (cid:7277)
(cid:7408) , (cid:6990)  (cid:7286):
IV. (cid:6989)  18 (cid:6981)   (cid:7083)  (cid:7340) (cid:7289)?
  (cid:7277)
(cid:7408) , (cid:6990)  (cid:7286):
V. (cid:6989) (cid:6981)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7263)  (cid:7289)……………………………
VI.  (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)     /(cid:7334) (cid:7263) ………………………….
VII.    .(cid:7008) ../... (cid:7367) (cid:7414) (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ………………….
VIII.    .(cid:7008) ../...  (cid:6979)  (cid:7408) (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) ……………..
IX.     (cid:7408)  (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) …………………….
X.  (cid:7272)(cid:7298)  (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:6990), (cid:7408)  , (cid:7011)  (cid:7286)……………………..
XI.  (cid:6981)   (cid:7409)  (cid:7390)(cid:7021): ……………………………….........
XII. (cid:6989) (cid:7079)(cid:7004) (cid:7340)       (cid:7409)    ?
 (cid:7277)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
168 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
.  (cid:7272):(cid:7286)
•
:
•
(cid:7408) :……………… (cid:7021)  …………………………….
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7079) (cid:7367)      (cid:7021)  
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6979) (cid:6981)(cid:7385) (cid:6981)(cid:7385)
•
(cid:7340)(cid:7298)      :
 (cid:7277)
(cid:7011)  :
(cid:7298)/(cid:7069) (cid:7409) (cid:6990) (cid:7011)
(cid:7271)(cid:6991)/(cid:7408)(cid:7004)  (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021)
(cid:6981) (cid:6979)
(cid:7340)(cid:7298)   /(cid:6981)(cid:6979)
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:6981)     (cid:7011)  
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:6989)     (cid:7409)     
  (cid:7334)   
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)      (cid:7289)
 (cid:7277)
•
  -   (cid:7011)  (cid:7289)
  (cid:7334)  (cid:7011)   
(cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)    
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)     /  (cid:7373)  (cid:7289)
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)  /(cid:7082)     (cid:7289)
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:7079)(cid:7399) (cid:7390)(cid:7334)(cid:7298)     (cid:7289)
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)    (cid:6979) (cid:7011)  
/ (cid:6979)
•
(cid:6989)   (cid:7409)    (cid:6979)   
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)  - ,      
 (cid:7277)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 169
•
(cid:6989)    (cid:6981) (cid:6981)(cid:7385)     (cid:7289)  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)(cid:7080) (cid:7011)   (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)    (cid:7011)    (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:7286)  (cid:7021) (cid:7011)   (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:7011)   (cid:7277)
•
 (cid:7286)   (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021)    (cid:7277)
• ,     (cid:6981)(cid:7385)  (cid:7414)  (cid:7277)
•
   (cid:7409)  (cid:7011) ( )
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)     (cid:7367)    
 (cid:7277)
 (cid:7277)
(cid:7340)(cid:7298)     (cid:7401) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)
•
(cid:7010)  
 (cid:7277)
•
 (cid:7286)     (cid:7289)
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:6981) (cid:7408)  
 (cid:7277)
•
    
 (cid:7277)
•
    
 (cid:7277)
•
/     
 (cid:7277)
•
 ( (cid:7408) )    (cid:7289)
(cid:7408)  (cid:7286)     
•
   
 (cid:7277)
•
 (cid:7286)      
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:7340)(cid:7298)  -  (cid:7409)   
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6981)(cid:7385)  (cid:7011) 
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6981)(cid:7385) (cid:6990) (cid:7286) (cid:7016)  
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:7390)(cid:7334)  (cid:7011)  
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7410)    (cid:7408)   
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)   (cid:7021)  (cid:7289)
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:7011)  
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7410)      
 (cid:7277)
 (cid:7277)
(cid:7405) (cid:7298)    
(cid:6979)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
170 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979)   
(cid:7407)
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:7286)   (cid:7008) (cid:7011) ?  (cid:7277)
•
/ (cid:6981) (cid:6989) (cid:6989) (cid:7408)    (cid:7408) (cid:7286)     
•
(cid:6989) (cid:6979) (cid:7409)     (cid:6981) (cid:7286) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)   (cid:7408)  ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)   / (cid:7409)  (cid:7011) ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)   (cid:7001)      (cid:7289)?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) /(cid:7287)(cid:7069) (cid:6994)  (cid:7289)?  (cid:7277)?
•
     (cid:6989) (cid:7275)  (cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7016) (cid:7390)(cid:7018)(cid:7021) ? 
•
(cid:6989)    , (cid:6981)    (cid:7334) ?  (cid:7277)
(cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7408)   / (cid:7021)/ (cid:6981)/(cid:7079):
•
(cid:6989)       (cid:7408)   (cid:7289)?  (cid:7277)
•
: (cid:7403)  (cid:7409)   (cid:7277)
•
 (cid:7298) (cid:7409)     / -    (cid:7289)?  (cid:7263) /  (cid:7263)
•
(cid:6989)   (cid:7374) (cid:7408)  (cid:7289)?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)   (cid:7408) (cid:7408)  ?(cid:7289)  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7374)  (cid:7408)   .(cid:7289)  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)     .  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)    (cid:7011) (cid:7289) ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7416)(cid:7298) (cid:7286) (cid:7013) (cid:7011) (cid:7289) ?  (cid:7277)
•
  (cid:7079) (cid:7408) (cid:6999) (cid:7409) (cid:6990)  /  /  /
•
  (cid:7079)  (cid:7409)   / 
•
(cid:6989)  (cid:6999)          (cid:7289)?  /  
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)   (cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7021)    (cid:6981) (cid:7079) (cid:7408)  ?(cid:7289)  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  (cid:7008) (cid:7021) : ………………………………………………..
•
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
•
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 171
. (cid:7340)(cid:7298)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)   :
•
(cid:7408)(cid:7004)  / (cid:7021)(cid:7021)(cid:7005) (cid:6981) : …………………………….........
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
............................................................................................................................
•
  /  : ………………………………………………………………….
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
•
    (cid:7409) (cid:7390)(cid:7021) : ..................................................................
......................................................................................................................
•
(cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7408)(cid:6981):
 (cid:6981)  / 

(cid:7408) (cid:7286)


  / 
•
(cid:6979) ((cid:7407) (cid:6979) /   /   (cid:7079)(cid:6979)
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
172 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
•
(cid:7013)(cid:7009) /  /
•
(cid:6989)    (cid:7013)(cid:7009) (cid:7409)  (cid:7011) ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)   (cid:7408)(cid:7059) ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)     (cid:7021)  (cid:7409)   ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)   (cid:6981)  ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989) (cid:7340)(cid:7298)      (cid:7409)  ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6989)      .1098 (cid:7079)(cid:7414)  ?  (cid:7277)
•
(cid:6981) /(cid:6981)(cid:6981)  / (cid:6979) / (cid:7408) (cid:7408)  (cid:7079) (cid:7409)  .(cid:7289)
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
•
(cid:7390) (cid:7079)(cid:6979) : ....................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
•
  : ..................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
•
(cid:7008) (cid:7298)/(cid:7298)   : ................................
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
•
  (cid:7069) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:7304): .................................
•
  (cid:7069)  (cid:7286) (cid:7340)(cid:7298) (cid:7409) (cid:7079)(cid:7397): ..................................
..........................................................................................................................
•
(cid:7079) (cid:7408)    (cid:6981): ...................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
•
(cid:7079)(cid:7013) (cid:7408) (cid:7008) (cid:6981)(cid:7059)  (cid:6981): ...................................................
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 173
. (cid:6981)  (cid:7011):
(cid:7059)..    (cid:7409)    (cid:7012)(cid:7334)
 (cid:7021)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
174 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
13
14
.   /(cid:7079) 
  (cid:7277)
•
   
•
     :
•
  (cid:7409) (cid:7298) (cid:7409)  :
..................................................................................................................................
 (cid:7277)
•
(cid:7079)    :   (cid:7277)
•
(cid:7079)    (cid:7409)    (cid:7000)(cid:7298) (cid:7409)
 ................................................................................................................................
.. (cid:7407)(cid:6981) (cid:6979) :
(cid:6981) (cid:7021) (cid:7021)
 (cid:7021) (cid:7021)
(cid:7286)(cid:7076) (cid:7079) (cid:7021)
(cid:7390)(cid:7334)     (cid:7390)(cid:7334)  
 (cid:7001)(cid:7011)(cid:7016)  /     (cid:7074)
  
  
(cid:7408)(cid:7004)  /(cid:7408)(cid:7004) (cid:6981)
(cid:7390)(cid:7334) (cid:7021) (cid:7021)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 175
(cid:7079)  – (cid:6981) (cid:7021)
  – (cid:6981) (cid:7021)
  / 
(cid:7008)    (cid:7407)(cid:6981)
(cid:7407)(cid:7009) / (cid:7012) (cid:7334):
.............................................................................................................................
(cid:6979)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)(cid:6979)
(cid:6979)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)(cid:6979):
(cid:6979)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)(cid:6979)
(cid:6979)   (cid:7021)    (cid:7021)(cid:6979)
………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………
[. . 1-02/2016-  (cid:7016)  –II]
(cid:7019) (cid:6989) , (cid:7334) 

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
176 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 21st September, 2016
G.S.R. 898.—In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 110 of
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), the Central Government
hereby makes the following model rules, namely:-
CHAPTER – I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) These rules may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.- (1) In these model rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(i) “Act” means the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of 2016);
(ii) “Authority” means the Central Adoption Resource Authority constituted under section 68 of the Act;
(iii) “Case Worker” means a representative from a registered voluntary or non-governmental
organisation who shall accompany the child to the Board or the Committee and may perform such
tasks as may be assigned to him by the Board or the Committee;
(iv) “Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System” means an online system for
facilitating and monitoring the adoption programme;
(v) “Child Study Report” means the report which contains details about the child, such as his date of
birth and social background;
(vi) “community service” means service rendered by children in conflict with law who are above the age
of fourteen years and includes activities like maintaining a park, serving the elderly, helping at a
local hospital or nursing home, serving disabled children, serving as traffic volunteers etc.
(vii) “Form” means the forms annexed to these rules;
(viii) “Home Study Report” means a report containing details of prospective adoptive parents or foster
parents, and shall include social and economic status, family background, description of home and
atmosphere, and health status;
(ix) “individual care plan” is a comprehensive development plan for a child based on age and gender
specific needs and case history of the child, prepared in consultation with the child, in order to
restore the child’s self-esteem, dignity and self-worth and nurture him into a responsible citizen and
accordingly the plan shall address the following, including but not limited to, needs of a child,
namely:-
(a) health and nutrition needs, including any special needs;
(b) emotional and psychological needs;
(c) educational and training needs;
(d) leisure, creativity and play;
(e) protection from all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment;
(f) restoration and follow up;
(g) social mainstreaming;
(h) life skill training.
(x) “in country adoption” means adoption of a child by a citizen of India residing in India;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 177
(xi) “Medical Examination Report” means the report of a child given by a duly licensed physician;
(xii) “Person-in-charge” means a person appointed for the control and management of the Child Care
Institution;
(xiii) “POCSO” means the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012);
(xiv) “rehabilitation-cum-placement officer” means an officer designated in every Child Care Institution for
the purpose of rehabilitation of children;
(xv) “Selection Committee” means a committee constituted by the State Government under rule 87 of
these rules;
(xvi) “social background report” means the report of a child in conflict with law containing the background
of the child prepared by the Child Welfare Police Officer;
(xvii) “social investigation report” means the report of a child containing detailed information pertaining to
the circumstances of the child, the situation of the child on economic, social, psycho-social and
other relevant factors, and the recommendation thereon;
(xviii)“Social worker” means a person with post graduate degree in Social Work or Sociology or
Psychology or Child Development or a graduate with minimum seven years of experience in child
education and development or protection issues, who is engaged by a Child Care Institution or
authorised by District Child Protection Unit or State Child Protection Society or State Adoption
Resource Agency or Central Adoption Resource Authority for preparing social investigation report
or individual care plan of the child, child study report, home study report of prospective adoptive
parent or foster parents, rendering post-adoption services, and performing any other functions as
assigned to such person under the Act or these rules;
Explanation: For the purposes of this definition, it is clarified that the qualifications of the social
worker member of the Board shall be as under section 4 of the Act.
(xix) “special educator” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Rules, 2012;
(xx) “State Child Protection Society” means a society constituted under section 106 of the Act;
(2) All words and expressions defined in the Act and used, but not defined in these rules, shall have the
same meaning as assigned to them in the Act.
CHAPTER – II
JUVENILE JUSTICE BOARD
3. Board.- There shall be one or more Boards in each district to be constituted by the State
Government through a notification in the Official Gazette.
4. Composition of the Board.- (1) The Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of First Class having at least three years experience to be designated as the Principal
Magistrate of the Board and two social worker members, of whom one shall be a woman, forming a Bench.
(2) The social worker members shall be appointed by the State Government on the recommendations
of the Selection Committee constituted under these rules.
(3) The social worker members shall not be less than thirty five years of age and shall have at least
seven years of experience of working with children in the field of education, health, or welfare activities, or
should be a practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or sociology or in the
field of law.
(4) As far as possible, the two social worker members so selected for a Board shall be from different
fields.
(5) All members of the Board including the Principal Magistrate, shall be given induction training and
sensitisation within a period of sixty days from the date of appointment.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
178 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
5. Term of Members of the Board .- (1) The term of the social worker member of the Board shall not
be more than for a period of three years from the date of appointment.
(2) A social worker member of the Board shall be eligible for appointment of maximum of two terms,
which shall not be continuous.
(3) The members may resign at any time, by giving one month's notice in writing to the State
Government.
(4) Any vacancy in the Board shall be filled by appointment of another person from the panel of names
prepared by the Selection Committee.
6. Sittings of the Board.- (1) The Board shall hold its sittings in the premises of an observation home
or at a place in proximity to the observation home or, at a suitable premise in any Child Care Institution
meant for children in conflict with law run under the Act, and in no circumstances shall the Board operate
from within any court or jail premises.
(2) The Board shall ensure that no person(s) un-connected with the case remains present in the room
when the case is in progress.
(3) The Board shall ensure that only those person(s), in the presence of whom the child feels
comfortable, are allowed to remain present during the sitting.
(4) The Board shall hold its sittings in a child-friendly premises which shall not look like a court room in
any manner and the sitting arrangement should be such to enable the Board to interact with the child face to
face.
(5) While communicating with the child, the Board shall use child friendly techniques through its
conduct and shall adopt a child friendly attitude with regard to body language, facial expression, eye
contact, intonation and volume of voice while addressing the child.
(6) The Board shall not sit on a raised platform and there shall be no barriers, such as witness boxes or
bars between the Board and the child.
(7) The Board shall sit on all working days for a minimum of six hours commensurate with the working
hours of a Magistrate Court, unless the case pendency is less in a particular district and the State
Government issues an order in this regard, or the State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette constitute more than one Board in a district after giving due consideration to the pendency of the
cases, area or terrain of the district, population density or any other consideration.
(8) When the Board is not sitting, a child in conflict with law may be produced before an individual
member of the Board. For the said purpose, one member of the Board shall always be available or
accessible to take cognizance of any matter of emergency and necessary directions required to deal with
the emergency situation shall be given by such member to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the local
police of the district. The Principal Magistrate shall draw up a monthly duty roster of the members who shall
be so available and accessible every day, including on Sundays and holidays. The roster shall be circulated
in advance to all the police stations, the Chief Judicial Magistrate/ Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, the District
Judge, the District Magistrate, the Committees, the District Child Protection Unit and the Special Juvenile
Police Unit.
(9) The social worker members of the Board shall be paid not less than Rs. 1500/- per sitting which
shall include sitting allowance, travel allowance and any other allowance, as the State Government may
prescribe.
(10) The Board shall be provided infrastructure and staff by the State Government.
7. Functions of the Board.- (1) The Board shall perform the following additional functions, namely:
(i) whenever necessary, the Board shall provide a translator or interpreter or special educator who
shall be paid not less than Rs.1500 per day and in case of translator, not exceeding Rs.100 per
page. For the said purpose, the District Child Protection Unit shall maintain a panel of translators,
interpreters and special educators who shall forward the same to the Board, the qualifications of the
translator, interpreter and special educator shall be as prescribed under the POCSO Act, 2012 and
rules framed thereunder;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 179
(ii) wherever required issue rehabilitation card in Form 14 to the child in conflict with law to monitor
the progress made by the child;
(iii) wherever required, pass appropriate orders for re-admission or continuation of the child in school
where the child has been disallowed from continuing his education in a school on account of the
pendency of the inquiry or the child having stayed in a Child Care Institution for any length of time;
(iv) interact with Boards in other districts to facilitate speedy inquiry and disposal of cases through due
process of law, including sending a child for the purpose of an inquiry or rehabilitation to a Board in
another district or State;
(v) inspect Child Care Institutions for children in conflict with law, issue directions in cases of any
noticeable lapses, suggest improvements, seek compliance and recommend suitable action,
including against any employee found in dereliction of duty to the District Child Protection Unit;
(vi) maintain a suggestion box or grievance redressal box in the premises of the Board at a prominent
place to encourage inputs from children and adults alike which shall be operated by the nominee of
the Principal Magistrate;
(vii) ensure smooth functioning of Children’s Committees in the Child Care Institutions for children in
conflict with law, for realising children’s participation in the affairs and management of such Child
Care Institutions;
(viii) review the Children's suggestion book at least once in a month;
(ix) ensure that the Legal cum Probation Officer in the District Child Protection Unit and the State or
District Legal Aid Services Authority extends free legal services to a child; and
(x) deploy, if necessary, the services of student volunteers or non-governmental organisation
volunteers for para-legal and other tasks such as contacting the parents of child in conflict with law
and collecting relevant social and rehabilitative information about the child.
CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
8. Pre-Production action of Police and other Agencies.-(1) No First Information Report shall be
registered except where a heinous offence is alleged to have been committed by the child, or when such
offence is alleged to have been committed jointly with adults. In all other matters, the Special Juvenile
Police Unit or the Child Welfare Police Officer shall record the information regarding the offence alleged to
have been committed by the child in the general daily diary followed by a social background report of the
child in Form 1 and circumstances under which the child was apprehended, wherever applicable, and
forward it to the Board before the first hearing:
Provided that the power to apprehend shall only be exercised with regard to heinous offences,
unless it is in the best interest of the child. For all other cases involving petty and serious offences and
cases where apprehending the child is not necessary in the interest of the child, the police or Special
Juvenile Police Unit or Child Welfare Police Officer shall forward the information regarding the nature of
offence alleged to be committed by the child along with his social background report in Form 1 to the Board
and intimate the parents or guardian of the child as to when the child is to be produced for hearing before
the Board.
(2) When a child alleged to be in conflict with law is apprehended by the police, the police officer
concerned shall place the child under the charge of the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the Child Welfare
Police Officer, who shall immediately inform:
(i) the parents or guardian of the child that the child has been apprehended along with the address of the
Board where the child will be produced and the date and time when the parents or guardian need to
be present before the Board;
(ii) the Probation Officer concerned, that the child has been apprehended so as to enable him to obtain
information regarding social background of the child and other material circumstances likely to be of
assistance to the Board for conducting the inquiry; and
(iii) a Child Welfare Officer or a Case Worker, to accompany the Special Juvenile Police Unit or Child

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
180 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Welfare Police Officer while producing the child before the Board within twenty- four hours of his
apprehension.
(3) The police officer apprehending a child alleged to be in conflict with law shall:
(i) not send the child to a police lock-up and not delay the child being transferred to the Child Welfare
Police Officer from the nearest police station. The police officer may under sub-section (2) of
section 12 of the Act send the person apprehended to an observation home only for such period till
he is produced before the Board i.e. within twenty-four hours of his being apprehended and
appropriate orders are obtained as per rule 9 of these rules;
(ii) not hand-cuff, chain or otherwise fetter a child and shall not use any coercion or force on the child;
(iii) inform the child promptly and directly of the charges levelled against him through his parent or
guardian and if a First Information Report is registered, copy of the same shall be made available to
the child or copy of the police report shall be given to the parent or guardian;
(iv) provide appropriate medical assistance, assistance of interpreter or a special educator, or any other
assistance which the child may require, as the case may be;
(v) not compel the child to confess his guilt and he shall be interviewed only at the Special Juvenile
Police Unit or at a child-friendly premises or at a child friendly corner in the police station, which does
not give the feel of a police station or of being under custodial interrogation. The parent or guardian,
may be present during the interview of the child by the police;
(vi) not ask the child to sign any statement; and
(vii) inform the District Legal Services Authority for providing free legal aid to the child.
(4) The Child Welfare Police Officer shall be in plain clothes and not in uniform.
(5) The Child Welfare Police Officer shall record the social background of the child and circumstances
of apprehending in every case of alleged involvement of the child in an offence in Form 1 which shall be
forwarded to the Board forthwith. For gathering the best available information, it shall be necessary upon
the Special Juvenile Police Unit or the Child Welfare Police Officer to contact the parent or guardian of the
child.
(6) A list of all designated Child Welfare Police Officers, Child Welfare Officers, Probation Officers,
Para Legal Volunteers, District Legal Services Authorities and registered voluntary and non-governmental
organisations in a district, Principal Magistrate and members of the Board, members of Special Juvenile
Police Unit and Childline Services with contact details shall be prominently displayed in every police station.
(7) When the child is released in a case where apprehending of the child is not warranted, the parents
or guardians or a fit person in whose custody the child alleged to be in conflict with law is placed in the best
interest of the child, shall furnish an undertaking on a non-judicial paper in Form 2 to ensure their presence
on the dates during inquiry or proceedings before the Board.
(8) The State Government shall maintain a panel of voluntary or non-governmental organisations or
persons who are in a position to provide the services of probation, counselling, case work and also
associate with the Police or Special Juvenile Police Unit or the Child Welfare Police Officer, and have the
requisite expertise to assist in physical production of the child before the Board within twenty-four hours and
during pendency of the proceedings and the panel of such voluntary or non-governmental organisations or
persons shall be forwarded to the Board.
(9) The State Government shall provide funds to the police or Special Juvenile Police Unit or the Child
Welfare Police Officer or Case Worker or person for the safety and protection of children and provision of
food and basic amenities including travel cost and emergency medical care to the child apprehended or
kept under their charge during the period such children are with them.
9. Production of the child alleged to be in conflict with law before the Board.-(1) When the child
alleged to be in conflict with law is apprehended, he shall be produced before the Board within twenty-four
hours of his being apprehended, along with a report explaining the reasons for the child being apprehended
by the police.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 181
(2) On production of the child before the Board, the Board may pass orders as deemed necessary,
including sending the child to an observation home or a place of safety or a fit facility or a fit person.
(3) Where the child produced before the Board is covered under section 83 of the Act, including a child
who has surrendered, the Board may, after due inquiry and being satisfied of the circumstances of the child,
transfer the child to the Committee as a child in need of care and protection for necessary action, and or
pass appropriate directions for rehabilitation, including orders for safe custody and protection of the child
and transfer to a fit facility recognised for the purpose which shall have the capacity to provide appropriate
protection, and consider transferring the child out of the district or out of the State to another State for the
protection and safety of the child.
(4) Where the child alleged to be in conflict with law has not been apprehended and the information in
this regard is forwarded by the police or Special Juvenile Police Unit or Child Welfare Police Officer to the
Board, the Board shall require the child to appear before it at the earliest so that measures for rehabilitation,
where necessary, can be initiated, though the final report may be filed subsequently.
(5) In case the Board is not sitting, the child alleged to be in conflict with law shall be produced before a
single member of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 7 of the Act.
(6) In case the child alleged to be in conflict with law cannot be produced before the Board or even a
single member of the Board due to child being apprehended during odd hours or distance, the child shall be
kept by the Child Welfare Police Officer in the Observation Home in accordance with rule 69 D of these
rules or in a fit facility and the child shall be produced before the Board thereafter, within twenty-four hours
of apprehending the child.
(7) When a child is produced before an individual member of the Board, and an order is obtained, such
order shall be ratified by the Board in its next meeting.
10. Post-production processes by the Board.- (1) On production of the child before the Board, the
report containing the social background of the child, circumstances of apprehending the child and offence
alleged to have been committed by the child as provided by the officers, individuals, agencies producing the
child shall be reviewed by the Board and the Board may pass such orders in relation to the child as it deems
fit, including orders under sections 17 and 18 of the Act, namely:
(i) disposing of the case, if on the consideration of the documents and record submitted at the time of
his first appearance, his being in conflict with law appears to be unfounded or where the child is
alleged to be involved in petty offences;
(ii) referring the child to the Committee where it appears to the Board that the child is in need of care and
protection;
(iii) releasing the child in the supervision or custody of fit persons or fit institutions or Probation Officers
as the case may be, through an order in Form 3, with a direction to appear or present a child for an
inquiry on the next date; and
(iv) directing the child to be kept in the Child Care Institution, as appropriate, if necessary, pending inquiry
as per order in Form 4.
(2) In all cases of release pending inquiry, the Board shall notify the next date of hearing, not later than
fifteen days of the first summary inquiry and also seek social investigation report from the Probation Officer,
or in case a Probation Officer is not available the Child Welfare Officer or social worker concerned through
an order in Form 5.
(3) When the child alleged to be in conflict with law, after being admitted to bail, fails to appear before
the Board, on the date fixed for hearing, and no application is moved for exemption on his behalf or there is
not sufficient reason for granting him exemption, the Board shall, issue to the Child Welfare Police Officer
and the Person-in-charge of the Police Station directions for the production of the child.
(4) If the Child Welfare Police Officer fails to produce the child before the Board even after the issuance
of the directions for production of the child, the Board shall instead of issuing process under section 82 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 pass orders as appropriate under section 26 of the Act.
(5) In cases of heinous offences alleged to have been committed by a child, who has completed the
age of sixteen years, the Child Welfare Police Officer shall produce the statement of witnesses recorded by

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
182 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
him and other documents prepared during the course of investigation within a period of one month from the
date of first production of the child before the Board, a copy of which shall also be given to the child or
parent or guardian of the child.
(6) In cases of petty or serious offences, the final report shall be filed before the Board at the earliest
and in any case not beyond the period of two months from the date of information to the police, except in
those cases where it was not reasonably known that the person involved in the offence was a child, in which
case extension of time may be granted by the Board for filing the final report.
(7) When witnesses are produced for examination in an inquiry relating to a child alleged to be in
conflict with law, the Board shall ensure that the inquiry is not conducted in the spirit of strict adversarial
proceedings and it shall use the powers conferred by section 165 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of
1872) so as to interrogate the child and proceed with the presumptions in favour of the child.
(8) While examining a child alleged to be in conflict with law and recording his statement during the
inquiry under section 14 of the Act, the Board shall address the child in a child-friendly manner in order to
put the child at ease and to encourage him to state the facts and circumstances without any fear, not only in
respect of the offence which has been alleged against the child, but also in respect of the home and social
surroundings, and the influence or the offences to which the child might have been subjected to.
(9) The Board shall take into account the report containing circumstances of apprehending the child
and the offence alleged to have been committed by him and the social investigation report in Form 6
prepared by the Probation Officer or the voluntary or non- governmental organisation, along with the
evidence produced by the parties for arriving at a conclusion.
10 A. Preliminary assessment into heinous offences by Board.- (1) The Board shall in the first
instance determine whether the child is of sixteen years of age or above; if not, it shall proceed as per
provisions of section 14 of the Act.
(2) For the purpose of conducting a preliminary assessment in case of heinous offences, the Board
may take the assistance of psychologists or psycho-social workers or other experts who have experience of
working with children in difficult circumstances. A panel of such experts may be made available by the
District Child Protection Unit, whose assistance can be taken by the Board or could be accessed
independently.
(3) While making the preliminary assessment, the child shall be presumed to be innocent unless
proved otherwise.
(4) Where the Board, after preliminary assessment under section 15 of the Act, passes an order that
there is a need for trial of the said child as an adult, it shall assign reasons for the same and the copy of the
order shall be provided to the child forthwith.
11. Completion of Inquiry.- (1) Where after preliminary assessment under section 15 of the Act, in
cases of heinous offences allegedly committed by a child, the Board decides to dispose of the matter, the
Board may pass any of the dispositional orders as specified in section 18 of the Act.
(2) Before passing an order, the Board shall obtain a social investigation report in Form 6 prepared by
the Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or social worker as ordered, and take the findings of the report
into account.
(3) All dispositional orders passed by the Board shall necessarily include an individual care plan in
Form 7 for the child in conflict with law concerned, prepared by a Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer
or a recognised voluntary organisation on the basis of interaction with the child and his family, where
possible.
(4) Where the Board is satisfied that it is neither in the interest of the child himself nor in the interest of
other children to keep a child in the special home, the Board may order the child to be kept in a place of
safety and in a manner considered appropriate by it.
(5) Where the Board decides to release the child after advice or admonition or after participation in
group counselling or orders him to perform community service, necessary direction may also be issued by
the Board to the District Child Protection Unit for arranging such counselling and community service.
(6) Where the Board decides to release the child in conflict with law on probation and place him under

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 183
the care of the parent or the guardian or fit person, the person in whose custody the child is released may
be required to submit a written undertaking in Form 8 for good behaviour and well-being of the child for a
maximum period of three years.
(7) The Board may order the release of a child in conflict with law on execution of a personal bond
without surety in Form 9.
(8) In the event of placement of the child in a fit facility or special home, the Board shall consider that
the fit facility or special home is located nearest to the place of residence of the child’s parent or guardian,
except where it is not in the best interest of the child to do so.
(9) The Board, where it releases a child on probation and places him under the care of parent or
guardian or fit person or where the child is released on probation and placed under the care of fit facility, it
may also order that the child be placed under the supervision of a Probation Officer who shall submit
periodic reports in Form 10 and the period of such supervision shall be maximum of three years.
(10) Where it appears to the Board that the child has not complied with the probation conditions, it may
order the child to be produced before it and may send the child to a special home or place of safety for the
remaining period of supervision.
(11) In no case, the period of stay in the special home or the place of safety shall exceed the maximum
period provided in clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 18 of the Act.
12. Pendency of Inquiry.- (1) For the purpose of sub-section (3) of section 16 of the Act, the
Board shall maintain a 'Case Monitoring Sheet' of every case and every child in Form 11. The said Form
shall be kept at the top of each case file and shall be updated from time to time. The following points shall
be considered so far as ‘progress of inquiry’ mentioned in Form 11 is concerned:
(i) time schedule for disposal of the case shall be fixed on the first date of hearing;
(ii) scheduled date given in column No. (2) of ‘progress of inquiry' shall be the outer limit within which
the steps indicated in column (1) are to be completed.
(2) The Board shall submit a quarterly report in Form 12 about the pendency of the cases, visits to
Homes etc. to the following:
(i) Chief Judicial Magistrate or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate;
(ii) District Magistrate.
(3) The District Judge shall conduct an inspection of the Board once every quarter and appraise the
performance of the members of the Board on the basis of their participation in the proceedings of the Board
and submit a report to the Selection Committee constituted under rule 87 of these rules.
13. Procedure in relation to Children’s Court and Monitoring Authorities.-
(1) Upon receipt of preliminary assessment from the Board the Children’s Court may decide whether there
is need for trial of the child as an adult or as a child and pass appropriate orders.
(2) Where an appeal has been filed under sub-section (1) of section 101 of the Act against the order of
the Board declaring the age of the child, the Children’s Court shall first decide the said appeal.
(3) Where an appeal has been filed under sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Act against the finding
of the preliminary assessment done by the Board, the Children’s Court shall first decide the appeal.
(4) Where the appeal under sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Act is disposed of by the Children’s
Court on a finding that there is no need for trial of the child as an adult, it shall dispose of the same as per
section 19 of the Act and these rules.
(5) Where the appeal under sub-section (2) of section 101 of the Act is disposed of by the Children’s
Court on a finding that the child should be tried as an adult the Children’s Court shall call for the file of the
case from the Board and dispose of the matter as per the provisions of the Act and these rules.
(6) The Children’s Court shall record its reasons while arriving at a conclusion whether the child is to be
treated as an adult or as a child.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
184 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(7) Where the Children’s Court decides that there is no need for trial of the child as an adult, and that it
shall decide the matter itself:
(i) It may conduct the inquiry as if it were functioning as a Board and dispose of the matter in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and these rules.
(ii) The Children’s Court, while conducting the inquiry shall follow the procedure for trial in summons
case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(iii) The proceedings shall be conducted in camera and in a child friendly atmosphere, and there shall
be no joint trial of a child alleged to be in conflict with law, with a person who is not a child.
(iv) When witnesses are produced for examination the Children’s Court shall ensure that the inquiry is
not conducted in the spirit of strict adversarial proceedings and it shall use the powers conferred by
section 165 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).
(v) While examining a child in conflict with law and recording his statement, the Children’s Court shall
address the child in a child-friendly manner in order to put the child at ease and to encourage him to
state the facts and circumstances without any fear, not only in respect of the offence which is
alleged against the child, but also in respect of the home and social surroundings and the influence
to which the child might have been subjected.
(vi) The dispositional order passed by the Children’s Court shall necessarily include an individual care
plan in Form 7 for the child in conflict with law concerned, prepared by a Probation Officer or Child
Welfare Officer or recognized voluntary organisation on the basis of interaction with the child and
his family, where possible.
(vii) The Children’s Court, in such cases, may pass any orders as provided in sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 18 of the Act.
(8) Where the Children’s Court decides that there is a need for trial of the child as an adult:
(i) It shall follow the procedure prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 of trial by sessions
and maintaining a child friendly atmosphere.
(ii) The final order passed by the Children’s Court shall necessarily include an individual care plan for
the child as per Form 7 prepared by a Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or recognized
voluntary organisation on the basis of interaction with the child and his family, where possible.
(iii) Where the child has been found to be involved in the offence, the child may be sent to a place of
safety till the age of twenty-one years.
(iv) While the child remains at the place of safety, there shall be yearly review by the Probation Officer
or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker in Form 13 to evaluate the progress of the
child and the reports shall be forwarded to the Children’s Court.
(v) The Children’s Court may also direct the child to be produced before it periodically and at least once
every three months for the purpose of assessing the progress made by the child and the facilities
provided by the institution for the implementation of the individual care plan.
(vi) When the child attains the age of twenty-one years and is yet to complete the term of stay, the
Children’s Court shall:
(a) interact with the child in order to evaluate whether the child has undergone reformative
changes and if the child can be a contributing member of the society.
(b) take into account the periodic reports of the progress of the child, prepared by the
Probation Officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker, if needed and
further direct that institutional mechanism if inadequate be strengthened.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 185
(c) After making the evaluation, the Children’s Court may decide to:
(ca) release the child forthwith;
(cb) release the child on execution of a personal bond with or without sureties for good
behaviour;
(cc) release the child and issue directions regarding education, vocational training,
apprenticeship, employment, counselling and other therapeutic interventions with a view to
promoting adaptive and positive behaviour etc.;
(cd) release the child and appoint a monitoring authority for the remainder of the
prescribed term of stay. The monitoring authority, where appointed shall maintain a
Rehabilitation Card for the child in Form 14.
(vii) For the purpose of sub-rule (vi) (c) (cd) of this rule:
(a) A Probation Officer or Case Worker or Child Welfare Officer or a fit person may be
appointed as a monitoring authority.
(b) The District Child Protection Unit shall maintain a list of such persons who can be engaged
as monitoring authorities which shall be sent to the Children’s Court along with bi-annual
updates.
(c) The child shall for the first quarter after release, meet with the monitoring authority on a
fortnightly basis or at such intervals as may be directed by the Children’s Court. The monitoring
authority shall fix a time and venue for such meetings in consultation with the child. The
monitoring authority will forward its observations on the progress of the child on a monthly basis
to the Children’s Court.
(d) At the end of the first quarter the monitoring authority shall make recommendations
regarding the further follow up procedure required for the child.
(e) Where the child, after release is found to be indulging in criminal activities or associating
with people with criminal antecedents, he shall be brought before the Children’s Court for
further orders.
(f) If it is found that the child no longer requires to be monitored, the monitoring authority shall
place the detailed report with recommendations before the Children’s Court which shall issue
further directions either terminating the monitoring or for its continuation.
(g) After the first quarter, the child shall meet the monitoring authority at such intervals as may
be directed by the Children’s Court based on the recommendations made by the monitoring
authority at the end of the first quarter and the monitoring authority shall forward its report to the
Children’s Court which shall review the same every quarter.
14. Destruction of records.- The records of conviction in respect of a child in conflict with law shall be
kept in safe custody till the expiry of the period of appeal or for a period of seven years, and no longer, and
thereafter be destroyed by the Person-in-charge or Board or Children’s Court, as the case may be:
Provided that in case of a heinous offence where the child is found to be in conflict with law under
clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 19 of the Act, the relevant records of conviction of such child shall be
retained by the Children’s Court.
CHAPTER IV
CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
15. Composition and Qualifications of Members of the Committee.- (1) There shall be one or more
Committees in each district to be constituted by the State Government through a notification in the Official
Gazette.
(2) The Chairperson and members of the Committee shall be appointed by the State Government on the
recommendation of the Selection Committee under rule 87 of these rules.
(3) The Chairperson and the members shall be above the age of thirty-five years and shall have a
minimum of seven years of experience of working with children in the field of education, health, or welfare

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
186 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
activities, or should be a practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or psychiatry or social
work or sociology or human development or in the field of law or a retired judicial officer.
(4) A member of the Committee shall be eligible for appointment of maximum of two terms, which shall
not be continuous.
(5) All persons, on selection shall mandatorily be given training under rule 89 within a period of sixty
days from the date of appointment.
(6) The Chairperson and the members may resign at any time by giving one month's notice in writing to
the State Government.
16. Rules and Procedures of Committee.- (1) The Chairperson and members of the Committee shall
be paid such sitting allowance, travel allowance and any other allowance, as the State Government may
prescribe but not less than Rs.1500 /- per sitting.
(2) A visit to an existing Child Care Institution by the Committee shall be considered as a sitting of the
Committee.
(3) The Committee shall hold its sittings in the premises of a children’s home or, at a place in proximity
to the children’s home or, at a suitable premises in any institution run under the Act for children in need of
care and protection.
(4) The Committee shall ensure that no person(s) un-connected with the case remains present in the
room when the session is in progress.
(5) The Committee shall ensure that only those person(s), in the presence of whom the child feels
comfortable, shall be allowed to remain present during the sitting.
(6) At least one member of the Committee shall always be available or accessible to take cognizance
of any matter of emergency and issue necessary directions to the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local
police of the district. For this purpose the Chairperson of the Committee shall draw up a monthly duty roster
of the Committee members who shall be available and accessible every day, including on Sundays and
holidays. The roster shall be circulated in advance to all the police stations, the Chief Judicial
Magistrate/Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, the District Judge, the District Magistrate, the Board, the District
Child Protection Unit and the Special Juvenile Police Unit.
(7) The Committee shall sit on all working days for a minimum of six hours commensurate with the
working hours of a magistrate court, unless the case pendency is less in a particular district and the State
Government concerned issues an order in this regard:
Provided that the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette constitute more than
one Committee in a district after giving due consideration to the pendency of the cases, area or terrain of
the district, population density or any other consideration.
(8) On receiving information about a child or children in need of care and protection, who cannot be
produced before the Committee, the Committee shall reach out to the child or children and hold its sitting at
a place that is convenient for such child or children.
(9) While communicating with the child, the Committee members shall use child friendly techniques
through their conduct.
(10) The Committee shall hold its sittings in a child-friendly premises which shall not look like a court
room in any manner and the sitting arrangement should be such to enable the Committee to interact with
the child face to face.
(11) The Committee shall not sit on a raised platform and there shall be no barriers, such as witness boxes
or bars between the Committee and the children
(12) The Committee shall be provided infrastructure and staff by the State Government.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 187
17. Additional Functions and Responsibilities of the Committee.- In addition to the functions and
responsibilities of the Committee under section 30 of the Act, the Committee shall perform the following
functions to achieve the objectives of the Act, namely:
(i) document and maintain detailed case record along with a case summary of every case dealt by the
Committee in Form 15;
(ii) maintain a suggestion box or grievance redressal box at a prominent place in the premises of the
Committee to encourage inputs from children and adults alike which shall be operated by the District
Magistrate or his nominee;
(iii) ensure smooth functioning of Children’s Committees in the Child Care Institutions for children in
need of care and protection within its jurisdiction, for realising children’s participation in the affairs and
management of the said Child Care Institutions;
(iv) review the Children's Suggestion Book at least once a month;
(v) send quarterly information in Form 16 about children in need of care and protection received by it to
the District Magistrate with all relevant details on nature of disposal of cases, pending cases and reasons
for such pendency;
(vi) wherever required, issue rehabilitation card in Form 14 to children in need of care and protection to
monitor their progress;
(vii) maintain the following records in a register:
(a) entries of the cases listed in a day and next date and the Committee shall prepare a daily
cause list of the cases before it;
(b) entries and particulars of children brought before the Committee and details of the Child
Care Institution where the children are placed or the address where the children are sent;
(c) execution of bonds;
(d) movement including visits to institutions;
(e) children declared legally free for adoption;
(f) children recommended for or placed in sponsorship;
(g) children placed in individual or group foster care;
(h) children transferred to or received from another Committee;
(i) children for whom follow up is to be done;
(j) children placed in after care;
(k) inspection record of the Committee;
(l) record of Minutes of the meetings of the Committee;
(m) correspondence received and sent;
(n) any other record or register which the Committee may require.
(viii) All information listed in clause (vii) of this rule may be digitised and a software may be developed
by the State Government.
CHAPTER V
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
18. Production before the Committee.- (1) Any child in need of care and protection shall be produced
before the Committee during the working hours at its place of sitting and beyond working hours before the
member as per the duty roster:
Provided that where the child cannot be produced before the Committee, the Committee shall reach
out to the child where the child is located.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
188 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) Whoever produces the child before the Committee shall make a report in Form 17 containing the
particulars of the child as well as the circumstances in which the child was received or found.
(3) In case of a child less than two years of age, who is medically unfit, the person or the organisation
who comes in contact with the child in need of care and protection shall send a written report along with the
photograph of the child to the Committee within twenty-four hours and produce the child before the
Committee as soon as the child is medically fit along with a medical certificate to that effect.
(4) The Committee after interaction with the child may issue directions for placing the child with the
parent or guardian or Children’s Home, where such Home is available in the vicinity of the Committee
before which the child is produced, and in the absence of such Home, to direct the placing of the child in
safe custody of a fit person or a fit facility.
(5) The Committee or the member on duty shall issue the order for placing the child in Children’s Home
in Form 18.
(6) The Committee or the member on duty shall order immediate medical examination of the child
produced before the Committee or the member on duty, if such examination is needed.
(7) In the case of abandoned or lost or orphaned child, the Committee, before passing an order
granting interim custody of the child pending inquiry, shall see that, the information regarding such child is
uploaded on a designated portal.
(8) The Committee may, while making an order in Form 19 for placing a child under the care of a
parent, guardian or fit person, pending inquiry or at the time of restoration, as the case may be, direct such
parent, guardian or fit person to enter into an undertaking in Form 20.
(9) Whenever the Committee orders a child to be kept in an institution, it shall forward to the Person-in-
charge of such institution, a copy of the order of short term placement pending inquiry in Form 18 with
particulars of the Child Care Institution and parents or guardian and previous record. A copy of such order
shall also be forwarded to the District Child Protection Unit.
19. Procedure for inquiry.- (1) The Committee shall inquire into the circumstances under which the
child is produced and accordingly declare such child to be a child in need of care and protection.
(2) The Committee shall, prima facie determine the age of the child in order to ascertain its jurisdiction,
pending further inquiry as per section 94 of the Act, if need be.
(3) When a child is brought before the Committee, the Committee shall assign the case to a social
worker or Case Worker or Child Welfare Officer or to any recognised non-governmental organisation for
conducting the social investigation under sub-section (2) of section 36 of the Act through an order in
Form 21.
(4) The Committee shall direct the person or organisation concerned to develop an individual care plan
in Form 7 including a suitable rehabilitation plan. The individual care plan prepared for every child in the
institutional care shall be developed with the ultimate aim of the child being rehabilitated and re-integrated
based on the case history, circumstances and individual needs of the child.
(5) The inquiry shall satisfy the basic principles of natural justice and shall ensure the informed
participation of the child and the parent or guardian. The child shall be given an opportunity to be heard and
his opinion shall be taken into consideration with due regard to his age and level of maturity. The orders of
the Committee shall be in writing and contain reasons.
(6) The Committee shall interview the child sensitively and in a child friendly manner and will not use
adversarial or accusatory words or words that adversely impact the dignity or self-esteem of the child.
(7) The Committee shall satisfy itself through documents and verification reports, before releasing or
restoring the child, as per Form 19, in the best interest of the child.
(8) The social investigation conducted by a social worker or Case Worker or Child Welfare Officer of
the institution or any non-governmental organisation shall be as per Form 22 and must provide an
assessment of the family situation of the child in detail, and explain in writing whether it will be in the best
interest of the child to restore him to his family.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 189
(9) Before the Committee releases or restores the child, both the child as well as the parents or
guardians may be referred to the Counsellor.
(10) The Committee shall maintain proper records of the children produced before it including medical
reports, social investigation report, any other report(s) and orders passed by the Committee in regard to the
child.
(11) In all cases pending inquiry, the Committee shall notify the next date of appearance of the child not
later than fifteen days of the previous date and also seek periodic status report from the social worker or
Case Worker or Child Welfare Officer conducting investigation on each such date.
(12) In all cases pending inquiry, the Committee shall direct the person or institution with whom the child
is placed to take steps for rehabilitation of the child including education, vocational training, etc., from the
date of first production of the child itself.
(13) Any decision taken by an individual member, when the Committee is not sitting, shall be ratified by
the Committee in its next sitting.
(14) At the time of final disposal of a case, there shall be at least three members present including the
Chairperson, and in the absence of Chairperson, a member so nominated by the Chairperson to act as
such.
(15) The Committee shall function cohesively as a single body and as such shall not form any sub-
committees.
(16) Where a child has to be sent or repatriated to another district or state or country the Committee
shall direct the District Child Protection Unit to take necessary permission as may be required, such as
approaching the Foreigners Regional Registration Offices and Ministry of External Affairs for a no-objection
certificate, contacting the counterpart Committee, or any other voluntary organisation in the other district or
state or country where the child is to be sent.
(17) At the time of final disposal of the case, the Committee shall incorporate in the order of disposal, an
individual care plan in Form 7 of such child prepared by the social worker or Case Worker or Child Welfare
Officer of the institution or any non-governmental organisation, as the case may be.
(18) While finally disposing of the case, the Committee shall give a date for follow-up of the child not
later than one month from the date of disposal of the case and thereafter once every month for the period of
first six months and thereafter every three months for a minimum of one year or till such time as the
Committee deems fit.
(19) Where the child belongs to a different district, the Committee shall forward the age declaration,
case file and the individual care plan to the Committee of the district concerned which shall likewise follow-
up the individual care plan as if it had passed such disposal order.
(20) The individual care plan shall be monitored by means of a rehabilitation card in Form 14 issued for
the purpose by the Committee passing the disposal order and which shall form part of the record of the
Committee which follow up the implementation of the individual care plan. Such rehabilitation card shall be
maintained by the Rehabilitation- cum -Placement Officer.
(21) All orders passed by the Committee in respect of a child in need of care and protection shall also be
uploaded on the designated portal with due regard to the confidentiality and privacy of the child.
(22) When a parent or guardian, wishes to surrender a child under sub-section (1) of section 35 of the
Act, such parent or guardian shall make an application to the Committee in Form 23. Where such parent or
guardian is unable to make an application due to illiteracy or any other reason, the Committee shall facilitate
the same through the Legal Aid Counsel provided by the Legal Services Authority, the deed of surrender
shall be executed as per Form 24.
(23) The inquiry under sub-section 3 of section 35 of the Act shall be concluded by the Committee
expeditiously and the Committee shall declare the surrendered child as legally free for adoption after the
expiry of sixty days from the date of surrender.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
190 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(24) In case of orphan or abandoned child, the Committee shall make all efforts for tracing the parents or
guardians of the child and on completion of such inquiry, if it is established that the child is either an orphan
having no one to take care, or abandoned, the Committee shall declare the child legally free for adoption.
(25) In case an abandoned or orphan child is received by a Child Care Institution including a Specialised
Adoption Agency, such a child shall be produced before the Committee within twenty-four hours (excluding
the time necessary for the journey) along with a report in Form 17 containing the particulars and
photograph of the child as well as the circumstances in which the child was received by it and a copy of
such report shall also be submitted by the Child Care Institution or a Specialised Adoption Agency to the
local police station within the same period.
(26) The Committee shall issue an order in Form 18 for short term placement and interim care of the
child, pending inquiry under section 36 of the Act.
(27) The Committee shall use the designated portal to ascertain whether the abandoned child or orphan
child is a missing child while causing the details of the orphan or the abandoned child to be uploaded.
(28) The Committee, after taking into account the risk factors, and in the best interest of the child, may
direct the publication of the particulars and photograph of an orphan or abandoned child in national
newspapers with wide circulation within seventy two hours from the time of receiving the child for the
purposes of tracing out the biological parents or the legal guardian(s).
(29) The Committee, after making inquiry as per the provisions of the Act, shall issue an order in Form 25
declaring the abandoned or orphan child as legally free for adoption and send the same information to the
Authority.
(30) Where the parents of the child are traced, the procedure for restoration of the child shall be as per
rule 82 of these rules.
20. Pendency of cases.- (1) The Committee shall maintain a 'Case Monitoring Sheet' of every case
and in case there is more than one child in one case, a separate sheet shall be used for each child. The
case monitoring sheet shall be in Form 26. The said Form shall be kept at the top of each case file and
shall be updated from time to time. The following points shall be considered so far as ‘progress of inquiry'
mentioned in Form 26 is concerned:
(i) time schedule for disposal of the case should be fixed on the first date of hearing;
(ii) scheduled date given in column (2) of ‘progress of inquiry' shall be the outer limit within which the
steps indicated in column (1) is to be completed.
(2) The Committee shall submit a quarterly report to District Magistrate in Form 16 for review of
pendency of cases.
(3) The District Magistrate shall review the functioning of the Committee including by inspection once
every quarter and also appraise the performance of the Chairperson and the members of the Committee on
the basis of their participation in the proceedings of the Committee and submit a report to the Selection
Committee constituted under rule 87 of these rules.
CHAPTER VI
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL RE-INTEGRATION
21. Manner of Registration of Child Care Institutions.- (1) All institutions running institutional care
services for children in need of care and protection or children in conflict with law, whether run by the
government or voluntary organisation, shall be registered under sub-section (1) of section 41 of the Act,
irrespective of being registered or licensed under any other Act for the time being in force.
(2) All such institutions shall make an application in Form 27 together with a copy each of rules, bye-
laws, memorandum of association, list of governing body, office bearers, list of trustees, balance sheet of
preceding three years, statement of past record of social or public service provided by the institution to the
State Government and a declaration from the person or the organisation regarding any previous conviction
record or involvement in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child labour or that it
has not been black listed by the Central or State Government;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 191
(3) The State Government shall after verifying that provisions exist in the institution for the care and
protection of children, health, education, boarding and lodging facilities, vocational facilities and
rehabilitation as per the Act and the rules, may issue a registration certification to such institution under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the Act in Form 28.
(4) The State Government, may not grant provisional registration where adequate facilities do not exist
in the institution applying for registration and the State Government shall issue an order before the expiry of
one month from the date of receipt of the application that the institution is not entitled for even provisional
registration.
(5) The State Government, while taking a decision on the application for registration, may consider the
following namely:
(i) registration of the organisation under any law for the time being in force;
(ii) details of physical infrastructure, water and electricity facilities, sanitation and hygiene, recreation
facilities;
(iii) financial position of the organization and maintenance of documents along with audited statement
of accounts for the previous three years;
(iv) resolution of the Governing Body to run the institution or an open shelter;
(v) plan to provide services for children such as medical, vocational, educational, counselling, etc., in
case of new applicants and details of such services provided in case of existing institutions ;
(vi) arrangements of safety, security and transportation;
(vii) details of other support services run by the organisation;
(viii) details of linkages and networking with other governmental, non-governmental, corporate and other
community based agencies on providing need-based services to children;
(ix) details of existing staff with their qualification and experience;
(x) details of registration under Foreign Contribution Regulation Act and funds available, if any;
(xi)a declaration from the person or the organisation regarding any previous conviction record or
involvement in any immoral act or in an act of child abuse or employment of child labour;
(xii) any other criteria as prescribed by the State Government.
(6) The State Government shall conduct a detailed inspection where provisional registration has been
granted or review annually after registration under sub-section (1) of section 41 of the Act, of the facilities,
staff, infrastructure and compliance with the standards of care, protection, rehabilitation and reintegration
services and management of the institution or the organisation as laid down under the Act and the rules.
(7) If the inspection or the annual review reveals that there is unsatisfactory compliance with the
standards of care, protection, rehabilitation and reintegration services and management of the institution as
laid down under the Act and the rules or the facilities are inadequate, the State Government may, at any
time, serve notice on the management of the institution and after giving an opportunity of being heard,
declare within a period of sixty days from the date of the detailed inspection or annual review as the case
may be, that the registration of the institution or organisation, shall stand withdrawn or cancelled from a date
specified in the notice and from the said date, the institution shall cease to be an institution registered under
sub-section (1) of section 41of the Act.
(8) When an institution ceases to be an institution registered under the Act or has failed to apply for
registration within the time frame laid down in the said provision or has not been granted provisional
registration, the said institution shall be managed by the State Government or the children placed therein
shall be transferred by the order of the Board or the Committee, to some other institution, registered under
sub-section (1) of section 41 of the Act.
(9) All institutions shall be bound to seek renewal of registration three months prior to the expiry of the
period of registration and in case of their failure to seek renewal of registration before the expiry of the

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
192 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
period of registration of the institution, the institution shall cease to be an institution registered under sub-
section (1) of section 41 of the Act and provisions of sub-rule (8) of this rule shall apply.
(10) An application for renewal of registration of an institution shall be disposed of within sixty days from
the date of receipt of application.
(11) The decision on renewal of registration shall be based on the annual review done in the year in
which the renewal is sought.
(12) The Central Government shall facilitate developing a model online system for receipt and
processing of applications and grant or cancellation of registration and in the interim the systems existing in
the States and Union Territories shall continue.
22. Open Shelter.- (1) The State Government may establish open shelters by itself or through
voluntary or non-governmental organisations.
(2) All organisations and persons who wish to establish open shelters or already running open shelters
shall, make an application in Form 27 to the State Government for registration.
(3) The applicants shall submit a report of the need for opening such open shelters along with a survey
on the status of children indicating the number of children where the open shelter is proposed to be
established. After proper police verification and other inquiry as deemed necessary, the organisation or
person may be selected for running the open shelter.
(4) The open shelters shall be registered as provided under sub-section (1) of section 41 of the Act in
Form 28.
(5) The services provided in the open shelters may include day care and night residential facilities
including food, washing facilities and toilets, and any other facility as the State Government may deem fit.
(6) The capacity of an open shelter should be such as to accommodate twenty-five to fifty children at
one time and should include a kitchen, dining facilities, bathrooms and toilets, lockers and recreational
facilities.
(7) In cases where, the agency in charge of the Open Shelter finds that a child may require more than
short term care and protection exceeding twenty- four hours, such child may be produced before the
Committee for appropriate further steps.
(8) The open shelter shall not refuse admission to any child in need of care and protection at any time.
(9) Each open shelter shall send monthly information in Form 29 to the District Child Protection Unit
and the Committee regarding the children availing the services of the open shelter.
23. Foster Care.- (1) The State Government may place children in need of care and protection in foster
care including group foster care through order of the Committee for a short or extended period of time.
(2) The District Child Protection Unit shall be the nodal authority for implementing the foster care
programme in a district.
(3) All decisions related to placement of a child in foster care shall be taken by the Committee. Children
in the age group of six years and above may be considered for placement in foster care in the
circumstances mentioned in sub-rule (1) of rule 44 of these rules. Children below six years of age shall be,
as far as possible placed in adoption.
(4) Children in need of care and protection who are living in community may also be considered for
placement in foster care based on the child study report in Form 31 prepared by the District Child
Protection Unit.
(5) The Committee shall take into consideration the individual care plan and the opinion of the child
before deciding the nature of foster care with due regard to his age and maturity.The child shall be
informed and prepared throughout the process.
(6) Foster care may be for short term or long term depending upon the needs of the child. The duration
of short term Foster care shall be for a period of not more than one year.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 193
(7) Long term foster care, shall be for a period exceeding one year. This can be periodically extended
by the Committee till the child attains eighteen years of age on the basis of assessment of the compatibility
of the child with the foster care parents or in a group foster care setting.
(8) Recognising that every child has the right to grow in a family environment, every attempt shall be
made to reunite the child with his biological family, if possible.
(9) The Committee before placing the child in foster care shall obtain a Home Study Report of the
foster family through the District Child Protection Unit in Form 30.
(10) Children with special needs may be considered either for placement in foster family or group foster
care, provided the Home Study Report of the foster family supports their fitness or group setting has
facilities for care of such children.
(11) The number of children placed under group foster care shall not exceed eight children in one unit
including biological children of the foster caregiver.
(12) The District Child Protection Unit, while selecting foster family shall consider the following, namely:
(i) both the spouses must be Indian citizens;
(ii) both the spouses must be willing to foster the same child;
(iii) both the spouses must be above the age of thirty-five years and must be in good physical,
emotional and mental health;
(iv) ordinarily the foster family should have an income with which they are able to meet the needs of the
child;
(v) medical reports of all the members of the foster family residing in the premises should be obtained
including reports for Human Immuno Deficiency Virus (HIV), Tuberculosis (TB) and Hepatitis B etc.
to determine that they are medically fit; and
(vi) the foster family should have adequate space and basic facilities.
(13) The District Child Protection Unit, while selecting Group foster care setting shall consider the
following illustrative criteria:
(i) registration of the group setting under the Act;
(ii) recognition as a fit facility by Committee;
(iii) existence of child protection policy; and
(iv) sufficient space and proper amenities for children.
(14) The process for selection of Foster family or Group foster setting shall be notified by the State
Government.
(15) The Committee shall pass the final order in Form 32 for placing the child in foster care, specifying
the period for which the child is placed in foster care.
(16) The foster family or group foster care giver shall sign an undertaking for foster-care of the child in
Form 33.
(17) The District Child Protection Unit shall maintain a record of each child in foster care in Form 34.
(18) The Committee shall conduct monthly inspection of the foster families or foster care givers in Form
35 to check the well-being of the child.
(19) The foster family or group foster care giver shall:
(i) provide adequate food, clothing and shelter and education;
(ii) provide care, support and treatment for child’s overall physical, emotional and mental health;
(iii) ensure protection from exploitation, maltreatment, harm, neglect and abuse;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
194 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iv) provide age appropriate facilities for recreation, extra-curricular activities such as sports, music,
dance, drama, art, etc.;
(v) provide vocational training according to the interests of the child;
(vi) respect the privacy of the child and his biological family or guardian, and acknowledge that any
information provided about them is confidential and is not to be disclosed to another party without
prior consent;
(vii) provide treatment in emergent situations and inform the Committee and biological family about the
same which may pass appropriate orders wherever necessary;
(viii) support contact between the child and his biological family in consultation with the Committee
keeping in view the best interest of the child;
(ix) share and discuss the information pertaining to the progress of the child periodically with the
Committee and biological family of the child and produce the child before the Committee as and
when directed by the Committee; and
(x) ensure that the child’s whereabouts are known at all times, including reporting any changes of
address, holiday plans and any episodes of running away of the child to the Committee.
24. Sponsorship.- (1) The State Government shall prepare sponsorship programmes, which may
include:
(i) individual to individual sponsorship;
(ii) group sponsorship;
(iii) community sponsorship;
(iv) support to families through sponsorship; and
(v) support to Children Homes and Special Homes
(2) The sponsorship programme shall be implemented by the District Child Protection Unit which shall
provide a panel of persons or families or organisations interested in sponsoring a child.
(3) The panel will list sponsors according to the area of interest such as education, medical support,
nutrition, vocational training etc., and the nature of sponsorship.
(4) The District Child Protection Unit shall forward the panel to the Board or the Committee or the
Children’s Court.
(5) The Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court may suomotu, or on an application received in
that behalf, consider the placement of a child under sponsorship for which purpose it shall verify from the
panel whether a sponsor is available to support such child and pass an order for placement of the child
under sponsorship in Form 36.
(6) The District Child Protection Unit, in case of individual sponsorship, shall open an account in the name
of the child to be operated preferably by the mother. The money shall be transferred directly from the bank
account of the District Child Protection Unit to the bank account of the child.
(7) The duration of the sponsorship shall not ordinarily exceed three years.
25. After Care of Children Leaving Institutional Care.- (1) The State Government shall prepare a
programme for children who have to leave Child Care Institutions on attaining eighteen years of age by
providing for their education, giving them employable skills and placement as well as providing them places
for stay to facilitate their re-integration into the mainstream of society.
(2) Any child who leaves a Child Care Institution may be provided after care till the age of twenty-one
years on the order of the Committee or the Board or the Children’s Court, as the case may be , as per Form
37 and in exceptional circumstances ,for two more years on completing twenty-one years of age .

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 195
(3) The District Child Protection Unit shall prepare and maintain a list of organisations, institutions and
individuals interested in providing after care as per their area of interest such as education, medical
support, nutrition, vocational training etc. and the same shall be forwarded to the Board or the Committee
and all Child Care Institutions for their record.
(4) The Probation Officer or the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker or social worker, shall prepare a
post release plan and submit the same to the Board or the Committee, two months before the child is due to
leave the Child Care Institution, recommending after care for such child, as per the needs of the child.
(5) The Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court, while monitoring the post release plan will also
examine the effectiveness of the aftercare programme, particularly whether it is being utilized for the
purpose for which it has been granted and the progress made by the child as a result of such after-care
programme.
(6) Children who are placed in after care programme, shall be provided funds by the State Government
for their essential expenses; such funds shall be transferred directly to their bank accounts.
(7) The services provided under the after-care programme may include:
(i) community group housing on a temporary basis for groups of six to eight persons;
(ii) provision of stipend during the course of vocational training or scholarships for higher education and
support till the person gets employment;
(iii) arrangements for skill training and placement in commercial establishments through coordination
with National Skill Development Programme, Indian Institute for Skill Training and other such
Central or State Government programmes and corporates , etc.;
(iv) provision of a counsellor to stay in regular contact with such persons to discuss their rehabilitation
plans ;
(v) provision of creative outlets for channelising their energy and to tide over the crisis periods in their
lives;
(vi) arrangement of loans and subsidies for persons in after-care, aspiring to set up entrepreneurial
activities; and
(vii) encouragement to sustain themselves without State or institutional support.
26. Management and Monitoring of Child Care Institutions.- (1) The personnel strength of a Child
Care Institution shall be determined according to the duty, posts, hours of duty and category of children that
the staff is meant to cater to.
(2) The staff of the Child Care Institution shall be subject to control and overall supervision of the
Person-in-charge who by order, shall determine their specific duties and responsibilities in keeping with the
statutory requirements of the Act and these rules.
(3) The number of posts in each category of staff shall be fixed on the basis of capacity of the
institution and shall proportionately increase with the increase in the capacity of the institution.
(4) In case of Child Care Institutions housing girls, only female Person-in charge and staff shall be
appointed.
(5) Any person associated with a Child Care Institution should not have been convicted of an offence or
have been involved in any immoral act or in act of child abuse or employment of child labour or in an
offence involving moral turpitude or hold any office in any political party during his tenure.
(6) No person shall be appointed to or work in a Child Care Institution without police verification.
(7) The suggested staffing pattern for an institution with a capacity of 100 children may be as below:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
196 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
S. No Personnel/ Staff Number
1. Person-in-charge (Superintendent) 1
2. Probation Officer/Child Welfare Officer/Case Workers (NGOs) 3
A Child Welfare Officer may be designated as Rehabilitation-cum-Placement
Officer
3. Counselor/ Psychologists/mental health expert 2
4. House Mother/ House Father 4
5. Educator/ Tutor 2(Part time)
6. Medical Officer (Physician) 1 (on call)
7. Para-medical staff/ Staff Nurse/Nursing Orderly 1
8. Store Keeper cum Accountant 1
9. Art & Craft & activity teacher 1(Part time)
10. PT Instructor-cum-Yoga trainer 1(Part time)
11. Cook 2
12. Helper 2
13. House keeping 2
14. Driver 1
15. Gardener 1(Part time)
(8) In case of institutions housing infants, provision for ayahs and paramedical staff shall be made as
per need.
(9) The security personnel shall be deployed as per nature and requirement of the Child Care
Institution, taking into consideration strength of the children, age groups, physical and mental status,
segregation facility based on the nature of offence and structure of the Institution.
(10) The security personnel to be engaged or appointed shall be adequately trained and oriented to deal
with the children with sensitivity preferably ex-servicemen or retired para-military personnel or through
Director General of Resettlement.
(11) The security personnel shall not be with arms or guns but have training and special skills to handle
a crisis situation, control violence and escape of children from the institution, conduct search and frisking
and security surveillance.
27. Fit Facility.- (1) The Board or the Committee shall on an application from any institution or
organisation run by Government or non-governmental organisation, recognise the facility as a fit facility
provided the manager of that facility is willing temporarily to receive a child for a specific purpose or for
group foster care.
(2) An application in Form 38 for recognition shall be accompanied with a copy each of rules, bye-laws,
memorandum of association, list of governing body, office bearers, list of trustees, balance sheet of the
preceding three years, statement of past record of social or public service provided by the institution or
organisation.
(3) Any facility for recognition as a fit facility shall:
(i) meet the basic standards of care and protection to the child;
(ii) provide basic services to any child placed with it;
(iii) prevent child placed with it to any form of cruelty or exploitation or neglect or abuse of any kind;
and
(iv) abide by the orders passed by the Board or the Committee.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 197
(4) The Board or the Committee, after proper inspection and inquiry to ensure that provisions exist in
the institution for the care and protection of children with reference to their health, education, boarding and
lodging facilities, vocational facilities and rehabilitation as per the rules, and consideration of such other
material as may be available, may grant recognition to such institution or organisation as a fit facility in
Form 39:
Provided that any person associated with such institution or organisation should not have been
convicted of an offence or have been involved in any immoral act or in act of child abuse or employment of
child labour or in an offence involving moral turpitude.
(5) A decision on the application for recognition of an institution or organisation shall be taken by the
Board or the Committee within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the application.
(6) The recognition to an institution or an organisation as a fit facility shall be initially for a period of
three years which may be renewed for a further period of three years in accordance with sub-rule (4) of this
rule.
(7) The Board or the Committee may, if dissatisfied with the standard of care and protection provided,
or conditions prevailing in the facility, or the management of the institution or the organisation recognised
under the Act or on an adverse report made by an inspection committee appointed under section 54 of the
Act, or for any other reason, at any time, by a reasoned order, withdraw the recognition of the institution or
the organisation as a fit facility and from the date specified in the order of the Board or the Committee, the
institution or the organisation shall cease to be a fit facility recognized under the Act and the rules.
(8) Where the recognition of a fit facility is withdrawn by the Board or the Committee, intimation of the
same shall be sent to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit and District Child Protection Unit
and the children placed with such an institution or organisation may be placed by the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court to another fit facility or any other Child Care Institution.
(9) A list of fit facilities approved by the Board or the Committee shall be kept in that office and be sent
to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit, the District Child Protection Unit and the State Child
Protection Society.
(10) An institution or organisation shall be recognised as a fit facility for purposes which may include:
(i) short term care;
(ii) medical care treatment and specialised treatment;
(iii) psychiatric and mental health care;
(iv) de-addiction and rehabilitation;
(v) education;
(vi) vocational training and skill development;
(vii) witness protection; and
(viii) group foster care.
(11) The services to be provided by the fit facility may include:
(i) food, clothing, water, sanitation and hygiene;
(ii) mental health interventions including counselling;
(iii) medical facilities including first aid and to facilitate specialised treatment;
(iv) formal age appropriate education including bridge education and continuing education and life skill
education; and
(v) recreation, sports, fine arts and group work activities.
(12) The placement of a child in a fit facility shall be for a period as deemed fit by the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
198 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
28. Fit Person.- (1) Any individual who is fit to temporarily receive a child for care, protection or
treatment, for a period as may be necessary, may be recognised by the Board or the Committee as a fit
person.
(2) The Board or the Committee may identify a panel of persons on the basis of their credentials,
respectability, expertise, professional qualifications, experience of dealing with children and their willingness
to receive the child and shall recognise them as fit persons for the purposes of the Act:
Provided that such a person should not have been accused of an offence under the Act or have
been involved in any immoral act or in act of child abuse or employment of child labour or in an offence
involving moral turpitude.
(3) The Board or the Committee may also appoint any person as a fit person on need basis for a child
or children after verifying the credentials of such person, and wherever possible, after getting police
verification done on such a person .
(4) The Board or the Committee may, if dissatisfied with the standard of care and protection provided
or for any other reason, at any time, by a reasoned order withdraw the recognition of the person as a fit
person from the date specified in the order of the Board or the Committee.
(5) Where the recognition of a fit person is withdrawn by the Board or the Committee, intimation of the
same shall be sent to the Children’s Court, Special Juvenile Police Unit and District Child Protection Unit
and the child placed with such a fit person may be placed by the Board or the Committee or the Children’s
Court to another fit person or with a fit facility or any Child Care Institution.
(6) A list of fit persons recognised by the Board or the Committee shall be kept in the office of the
Board and the Committee and the Children’s Court and be sent to the Special Juvenile Police Unit, the
District Child Protection Unit and the State Child Protection Society.
(7) The Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court may place the child with a fit person in cases
wherever required, including where the child cannot be sent to a Child Care Institution due to distance and/
or odd time.
(8) The fit person shall:
i) have the capacity and willingness to receive the child; and
ii) provide basic services for care and protection of the child.
(9) The Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court, depending on the need of the child and in
consultation with the fit person shall determine the period for which a child shall remain with the fit person.
(10) The child shall not be placed with a fit person for a period exceeding thirty days and in such cases
where the child requires further care, the Committee may consider the placement of the child in foster care
or may consider other rehabilitative alternatives for the child. The Board or the Children’s Court in such
cases where the period of placement of the child may exceed thirty days, refer the matter to the Committee
for further orders in respect of the child.
29. Physical infrastructure.- (1) The accommodation in each institution shall be as per the following
criteria, namely:-
(i) Observation Home:
(a) separate observation homes for girls and boys;
(b) classification and segregation of children according to their age group preferably 7-11
years, 12-16 years and 16-18 years, giving due consideration to physical and mental status
and the nature of the offence committed.
(ii) Special Home:
(a) separate special homes for girls above the age of 10 years and boys in the age groups of
11 to 15 and 16 to 18 years;
(b) classification and segregation of children on the basis of age and nature of offences and
their mental and physical status.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 199
(iii) Place of Safety:
(a) for children in the age group of 16 to18 years alleged to have committed heinous offence
pending inquiry;
(b) for children in the age group of 16 to 18 years found to be involved in heinous offence upon
completion of inquiry;
(c) for persons above 18 years alleged to have committed offence when they were below the
age of 18 years pending inquiry;
(d) for persons above 18 years found to be involved in offence upon completion of inquiry;
(e) for children as per the orders of the Board under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 18
of the Act.
(iv) Children’s Home:
(a) while children of both sex below 10 years may be kept in the same home, separate bathing
and sleeping facilities shall be maintained for boys and girls in the age group of 5-10 years;
(b) separate children’s homes for boys and girls in the age group of 7-11 years and 12- 18
years;
(c) separate facilities for children upto the age of six years with appropriate facilities for infants.
(2) The Child Care Institutions shall be child-friendly and in no way shall they look like a jail or lock-up.
(3) Every Child Care Institution shall keep a copy of the Act and the rules framed by the State
Government, for use by both the staff and children residing therein.
(4) Each Child Care Institution shall have a Management Committee for the management of the
institution and monitoring the progress of every child in the home.
(5) The Child Care Institutions for children in conflict with law and children in need of care and
protection shall function from separate premises as per the criteria elaborated.
(6) The suggested norms for building or accommodation in each institution with 50 children may be as
under:
(i) 2 Dormitories Each 1000 Sq.ft. for 25 children i.e. 2000 Sq. ft.
(ii) 2 Class rooms 300Sq.ft. for 25 children i.e. 600 Sq. ft.
(iii) Sickroom/First aid room 75 Sq.ft. per children for 10 i.e. 750 Sq. ft.
(iv) Kitchen 250 Sq. ft.
(v) Dining hall 800 Sq. ft.
(vi) Store 250 Sq.ft.
(vii) Recreation room 300 Sq.ft.
(viii) Library 500 Sq.ft.
(ix) 5 Bathroom 25 Sq.ft. each i.e. 125 Sq. ft.
(x) 8 Toilets 25 Sq. ft. i.e. 200 Sq.ft.
(xi) Office rooms (a) 300 Sq.ft. (b) Person-in-charge room 200 Sq.ft.
(xii) Counselling and Guidance room 120 Sq.ft.
(xiii) Workshop 1125 Sq. ft. for 15 children @ of 75 Sq.ft. per trainee
(xiv) Residence for Person-in-charge (a) 2 rooms of 250 Sq.ft. each (b) Kitchen 75 Sq.ft. (b)
bathroom cum toilet 50 Sq ft.
(xv) 2 rooms for Juvenile Justice Board 300 Sq. ft each i.e. 600 Sq.ft.
or Child Welfare Committee
(xvi) Playground Sufficient area according to total number of children
Total 8495 Sq.ft.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
200 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(7) The Person-in-charge shall stay within the institution and be provided with quarters and in case he is not
able to stay in the Child Care Institution for valid reasons, any other senior staff member of the institution
shall stay in the institution and be in a position to supervise the overall care of the children and take
decisions in the case of any crisis or emergency.
(8) There shall be proper and non-slippery flooring for preventing accidents.
(9) There shall be adequate lighting, heating and cooling arrangements, ventilation, safe drinking water,
clean and accessible gender and age appropriate and disabled friendly toilets and high walls with barbed
wire fencing.
(10) All institutions under the Act shall:
(i) make provision of first-aid kit, fire extinguishers in kitchen, recreation room, vocational training
room, dormitories, store rooms and counselling room;
(ii) conduct periodic inspection of electrical installations;
(iii) ensure proper storage and inspection of articles of food; and
(iv) ensure stand-by arrangements for water storage and emergency lighting.
(11) Special infrastructural facilities and necessary equipment shall be provided to differently-abled
children. Such facilities and equipment shall be designed under the guidance of specialists or experts.
(12) Other logistical and functional requirements which would be provided may include:
(i) computer sets;
(ii) photocopiers;
(iii) printer, scanner cum fax;
(iv) telephone with internet facility;
(v) web cam;
(vi) furniture for officials, record keeping cabinets, work stations, wheel chair and stretchers for medical
room;
(vii) chairs and tables for study and dining hall;
(viii) projector.
30. Clothing, Bedding, Toiletries and other Articles.- (1) The clothing and bedding shall be as per
the scale and climatic conditions. The requirements of each child and the minimum standards for clothing
and bedding shall be as under:
A. BEDDING
S. No. Article Quantity to be provided per child
1. Mattress 1 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
1 year.
2. Cotton Durry 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 2 after every
2 years.
3. Cotton bed sheets 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
6 months.
4. Pillow (Cotton stuffed) 1 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
1 year.
5. Pillow covers 1 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
1 year.
6. Cotton blankets/ Khes 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
2 years.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 201
7. Cotton filled quilt 1 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
2 years (in cold region in addition to the blankets).
8. Mosquito net 1 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
6 months.
9. Cotton towels 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
3 months.
B. Clothing for Girls
S. No. Article Quantity per child
1. Skirts and Blouse or Salwar 5 sets per year for girls depending on age and regional
Kameez or Half Sari with Blouse preferences.
and Petticoat
2. Age appropriate undergarments 3 sets every quarter.
3. Sanitary Towels 12 packs per year for older girls.
4. Woollen Sweaters (full sleeves) 2 sweaters yearly.
5. Woollen Sweaters (Half sleeves) 2 sweaters yearly.
6. Woollen Shawls 1 per year.
7. Nightwear 2 sets every 6 months.
B. Clothing for Boys
S. No. Article Quantity per child
1. Shirts 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
6 months.
2. Shorts 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
6 months for younger boys.
3. Pants 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 1 after every
6 months for older boys.
4. Age appropriate undergarments 3 sets every quarter.
5. Woollen jerseys(full sleeves) 2 yearly.
6. Woollen jerseys 2 yearly.
(half sleeves)
7. Woollen Caps 1 in 1 year.
8. Kurta Pyjama for night wear 2 sets every 6 months.
C. Miscellaneous Articles
1. Slippers 1 pair at the time of admission and subsequently after
every 6 months.
2. Sports shoes 1 pair at the time of admission and subsequently 1 pair
after every 1 year.
3. School uniform 2 sets every six months for children attending schools.
4. School bag 1 every year for children attending schools.
5. School shoes 1 pair at the time of admission in school and
subsequently 1 pair after every 6 months.
6. Handkerchiefs 2 at the time of admission and subsequently 2 after every
2 months.
7. Socks 3 pairs every six months.
8. Stationery As per need.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
202 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) In addition to the clothing specified above, each child shall be provided, once in three years, with a
suit consisting of one white shirt, one pair of shorts or pants, one pair of white canvas shoes and one blazer
for use during ceremonial occasions. In the case of girls it shall be one white half sari or one salwar kameez
or one white skirt and one white blouse, a pair of white canvas shoes and a blazer.
(3) In every hospital attached to the institution where there is provision for in-patient cots, the following
scale has to be followed:
S. No. Night clothing and bedding Scale for supply
1. Mattress One per bed per 3 years.
2. Cotton bed sheets Four per bed per year.
3. Pillows One per bed per two year.
4. Pillow covers Four per bed per year.
5. Woollen blankets One per bed per 2 years.
6. Pyjamas and loose shirts (hospital 3 pairs per child per year.
type for boys)
7. Skirts and blouses or salwar kameez 3 pairs per child per year.
for girls
8. Cotton durry One per bed per three years.
(4) Toiletry: Every resident of the Child Care Institution shall be issued oil, soap and other material as
per the following scale:
S. No. Items Quantity to be issued per child
1. Hair Oil for grooming the hair 100 ml per month.
2. Toilet soap/handwash 2 bars of 100gm per month.
3. Tooth brush 1 in every 3 months.
4. Toothpaste 100gm (a tube) per month.
5. Comb 1 in every 3 month.
6. Shampoo sachets 8 in a month (10ml/ per sachet).
7. Bathing soap 2 bars of 125gm per month.
8. Hair clip/ band 2 bands in 3 month.
9. Moisturiser or cold cream (during 250 ml in a month.
winters)
(5) For washing of clothes and towels, bed-sheet, etc., the following scale may be followed:
(i) washing soap: 3 soaps for one month (125 gms) or equivalent washing powder;
(ii) whitening or bleaching agent to the extent required only for white clothing.
The hospital clothing shall not be mixed with other clothing at the time of washing and if necessary, the
Superintendent can issue the above items separately for washing of hospital clothing. The superintendent
may get installed washing machines, as required.
(6) The following items shall be provided for maintaining the Child Care Institutions in a healthy and
sanitary condition:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 203
S. No. Items Scale of Supply
1. Broom stick 25 to 40 per month depending on the area of the institution.
2. Pesticide spray As per the institution doctor’s advice.
3. Effective bugs killing agent As required.
4. Phenyl and cleaning acid Depending on the area of lavatories to be (daily) cleaned as
per institution doctor’s advice.
5. Mosquito repellent machines 2 per room per month with adequate fillets.
31. Sanitation and Hygiene.- (1) Every Child Care Institution shall have the following facilities, namely:
(i) sufficient treated drinking water; water filters or RO shall be installed at multiple locations in the
premises for easy access such as kitchen, dormitory, recreational rooms etc.;
(ii) sufficient water including hot water for bathing and washing clothes, maintenance and cleanliness
of the premises;
(iii) proper drainage system with regular maintenance;
(iv) arrangements for disposal of garbage;
(v) protection from mosquitoes by providing mosquito nets or repellants;
(vi) annual pest control;
(vii) sufficient number of well-lit and airy toilets with proper fittings in the proportion of at least one toilet
for seven children;
(viii) sufficient number of well-lit and airy bathrooms with proper fittings in the proportion of at least one
bath room for ten children;
(ix) sufficient space for washing and drying of clothes;
(x) washing machine wherever possible;
(xi) clean and fly-proof kitchen and separate area for washing utensils;
(xii) sunning of bedding twice every month and clothing on regular basis;
(xiii) maintenance of cleanliness in the Medical Centre;
(xiv) daily sweeping and wiping of all floors in the home;
(xv) cleaning or washing of the toilets and bathrooms twice everyday;
(xvi) proper washing of vegetables and fruits and hygienic manner of preparing food;
(xvii) cleaning of the kitchen slabs, floor and gas after every meal;
(xviii) clean and pest proof store for maintaining food articles and other supplies;
(xix) disinfection of the beddings at least once a year;
(xx) fumigation of a sick room or isolation room after every discharge in case of contagious or infectious
disease; and
(xxi) cleanliness in medical centre.
32. Daily Routine.- (1) Every Child Care Institution shall have a daily routine for children
developed in consultation with the Children’s Committees, which shall be prominently displayed at various
places within the Child Care Institution.
(2) The daily routine may provide, inter alia, for a regulated and disciplined life, personal hygiene and
cleanliness, physical exercise, yoga, educational classes, vocational training, organised recreation and
games, moral education, group activities, prayer and community singing and special programmes for
Sundays and holidays and national holidays, festive days, birthdays.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
204 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
33. Nutrition and Diet Scale.-(1) The following nutrition and diet scale shall be followed by the Child
Care Institutions, namely:
(i) the children shall be provided four meals in a day including breakfast;
(ii) the menu shall be prepared with the help of a nutritional expert or doctor to ensure balanced diet and
variety in taste as per the minimum nutritional standard and diet scale;
(iii) every Child Care Institution shall strictly adhere to the minimum nutritional standard and diet scale
suggested as specified below:
S.No. Name of the articles of diet Scale per head per day
1. Rice/Wheat/Ragi/Jowar 600 gms, (700 gms for16-18 yrs age)
of which atleast 100 gms to be either
Wheat or Ragi or Jowar or Rice.
2. Dal/ Rajma/ Chana 120 gms.
3. Edible Oil 25 gms.
4. Onion 25 gms.
5. Salt 25 gms.
6. Turmeric 05 gms.
7. Coriander Seed Powder 05 gms.
8. Ginger 05 gms.
9. Garlic 05 gms.
10. Tamarind/ Mango powder 05 gms.
11. Milk (at breakfast) 150 ml.
12. Dry Chillies 05 gms.
13. Vegetables Leafy 100 gms.
Non – leafy 130gms.
14. Curd or Butter Milk 100 gms/ml.
15. Chicken once a week or Eggs 4 days 115 gms.
16. Jaggery& Ground Nut Seeds or 60 gms each (100 gms for paneer)
Paneer (vegetarian only) Once in a week.
17. Sugar 40 gms.
18. Tea/Coffee 5gm.
19. Sooji/Poha 150 gms.
20. Ragi 150 gms.
Following items for 50 Children per day
21. Pepper 25 gms.
22. Jeera Seeds 25 gms.
23. Black Gram dal 50 gms.
24. Mustard Seeds 50 gms.
25. Ajwain Seeds 50 gms.
On Chicken Day for 10 Kg. of Chicken
26. Garam Masala 10 gms.
27. Kopra 150 gms.
28. KhasKhas 150 gms.
29. Groundnut Oil 500 gms.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 205
For Sick Children
30. Bread 500 gms.
31. Milk 500 ml.
32. Khichadi 300 gms.
Other Items
33. LP Gas for Cooking only
(2) Children may be provided special meals on holidays, festivals, sports and cultural day and
celebration of national festival.
(3) Infants and sick children shall be provided special diet according to the advice of the doctor on their
dietary requirement.
(4) The requirement of each child shall also be taken into account including need for iron and folic acid
supplements.
(5) The menu for the day shall be prepared in consultation with the Children’s Committee and shall be
displayed in the dining hall.
(6) Variation in diet may be as per seasonal and regional variations, a suggested diet variation is given
below:-
(i) varieties of dal e g., Toor (Arhar), Moong (Green Gram) and Chana (Bengal Gram) may be given
alternatively;
(ii) on non-vegetarian days, vegetarian children shall be issued with either 60 gms of jaggery and 60
gms of groundnut seeds per head in the shape of laddus or any other sweet dish or 100 gms paneer;
(iii) leafy vegetables such as Fenugreek (Methi), Spinach (Palak), Sarson (Mustard leaves)
GonguraThotakura or any other saag etc., may also be issued once in a week. If a kitchen garden is
attached to any institution, leafy vegetables, should be grown and issued and the Superintendent should
try to issue variety of vegetables and see that the same vegetable is not repeated for at least a period of
one week;
(iv) seasonal fruits shall be provided in a non-repetitive manner in sufficient quantities;
(v) the Person-in-charge may make temporary alterations in the scale of diet in individual cases when
considered necessary by him, or on the advice of the doctor of the institution subject to the condition that
the scale laid down is not exceeded.
(7) Meal Timing and Menu:
(i) Breakfast – 7.30 a.m. to 8.30 a.m.
(a) upma or chapattis made of wheat or ragi or any other dish;
(b) chutneys from Gongura or fresh curry leave or fresh coriander or Coconut and Putnadal
etc., dal or vegetable may be issued as a dish;
(c) milk;
(d) any seasonal fruit in sufficient quantity.
(ii) Lunch at 12.30 to 1.30 P.M. and Dinner – 7.00 P.M. – 8.00 P.M
(a) rice or Chapattis or combination of both;
(b) vegetable curry;
(c) sambar or dal;
(d) butter milk or curd.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
206 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(8) Others:
(i) depending on the season, the Person-in-charge shall have the discretion to alter the time for distribution
of food;
(ii) on the advice of the institution’s doctor or at the discretion of the Person-in-charge, every sick child
who is prevented from taking regular food, on account of his ill-health, may be issued with medical diet as
per the scale for sick children;
(iii) extra diet for nourishment like milk, eggs, sugar and fruits shall be issued to the children on the advice
of the institution doctor in addition to the regular diet, to gain weight or for other health reasons and for the
purpose of calculation of the daily ration, the sick children shall be excluded from the day’s strength;
(iv) special lunch or dinner may be provided to the children at the Child Care Institution at the rate fixed by
the Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution, from time to time on national festivals and festival
occasions, including:
(a) Republic Day (26th January);
(b) Independence Day (15th August);
(c) Mahatma Gandhi’s Birth day (2nd October);
(d) Children’s Day (14th November);
(e) National festivals;
(f) Local festivals;
(g) Annual Day of the Child Care Institution.
34. Medical Care.- (1) In all Child Care Institutions, a medical officer shall be made available on
call whenever necessary for regular medical check up and treatment of children.
(2) A nurse or a para medic shall be available round the clock in all Child Care Institutions.
(3) Every Child Care Institution may:
(i) arrange for medical examination of each child admitted in an institution by the Medical Officer
within twenty- four hours of admission and in special cases or medical emergencies immediately;
(ii) arrange for a medical examination of child by the Medical Officer at the time of transfer within
twenty four hours before transfer;
(iii) maintain a medical record of each child on the basis of monthly medical check-up and provide
necessary medical facilities;
(iv) ensure that the medical record includes weight and height record, any sickness and treatment, and
other physical or mental problems;
(v) have facilities for quarterly medical check-ups including dental check-up, eye testing and screening
for skin problems and for treatment of children;
(vi) every institution to have first aid kit and all staff be trained in handling first aid;
(vii) make necessary arrangements for the immunization of children;
(viii) take preventive measures in the event of out-break of contagious or infectious diseases;
(ix) keep sick children under constant medical supervision;
(x) not carry out any surgical intervention in a hospital on any child without the previous consent of his
parent or guardian, unless the parent or guardian cannot be contacted and the condition of the
child is such that any delay would, in the opinion of the medical officer, involve unnecessary
suffering or injury to the health of the child or danger to life, or without obtaining a written consent
to this effect from the Person-in-charge of the institution;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 207
(xi) provide or arrange for regular counselling of every child and ensure specific mental health
interventions for those in need of such services, including separate rooms for counselling sessions
within the premises of the institution and referral to specialised mental health centres, where
necessary; and
(xii) refer such children who require specialised drug de-addiction and rehabilitation programme, to an
appropriate centre administered by qualified persons where these programmes shall be adopted to
the age, gender and other specifications of the child concerned.
(4) Baseline investigation of Complete Blood Count (CBC), Urine Routine, HIV, VDRL, Hepatitis B
and Hepatitis C tests and allergy or addiction to drugs shall be conducted for all children at the time of
entry into the institution as suggested by the doctor after examining the child.
(5) Test for pregnancy or diseases for victims of sexual offences shall be conducted, if required by
the order of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court. In such cases the District Child
Protection Unit shall facilitate following of the procedures laid down in the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act, 1971, if so needed.
(6) The State Government through the District Child Protection Unit shall make provisions for those
children diagnosed with special problems such as hormonal problems, immuno-compromised diseases,
physical and mental disabilities on the recommendation of the medical officer. The children shall be kept
in special care homes or hospitals and avail necessary medical/ psychiatric and psychological support or
treatment.
(7) All girls who have attained puberty shall undergo health assessment to detect iron deficiency.
Necessary dietary plan and medicines shall be prescribed by the nutritionist and appointed doctor, if
need be.
(8) A psycho- social profile of every child shall be maintained by the Child Care Institution and updated
every month. Special observations may be recorded, when required. Person-in-charge of the institution
shall ensure that any recommendations made shall be duly complied with.
35. Mental Health.- (1) The environment in an institution shall be free from abuse, allowing
children to cope with their situation and regain confidence.
(2) All persons involved in taking care of the children in an institution shall participate in facilitating an
enabling environment and work in collaboration with the therapists as needed.
(3) Milieu based interventions and individual therapy are must for every child and shall be provided in
all institutions.
Explanation.― For the purpose of this sub-rule, “milieu based intervention” is a process of recovery, which
starts through providing an enabling culture and environment in an institution so as to ensure that each
child’s abilities are discovered and they have choices and right to take decisions regarding their life and
thus, develop and identify beyond their negative experiences, such intervention which has a critical
emotional impact on the child.
(4) Individual therapy is a specialised process and each institution shall make provisions for it as a
critical mental health intervention.
(5) Every institution shall have the services of trained counselors or collaboration with external
agencies such as child guidance centres, psychology and psychiatric departments or similar Government
and non-Governmental agencies, for specialised and regular individual therapy for the child,
(6) The recommendations of mental health experts shall be maintained in every case file, as required.
(7) No child shall be administered medication for mental health problems without a psychological
evaluation and diagnosis by trained mental health professionals.
(8) Medicines should be administered to the children only by trained medical staff and not by any other
staff of the Home.
36. Education.-(1) Every institution shall provide education to all children according to the age and
ability, both inside the institution or outside, as per requirement.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
208 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) There shall be a range of educational opportunities including, mainstream inclusive schools, bridge
school, open schooling, non formal education and learning where needed.
(3) Wherever necessary, extra coaching shall be made available to school going children in the
institutions by encouraging volunteer services or tying up with coaching centres or tutors.
(4) Specialised trainers and experts shall be appointed to cater to the educational needs of children
with special needs either physical or mental. Learning disorders shall be identified, assessed and reported
in the Individual Care Plan. Further assistance shall be given to the child by trained professionals.
(5) Regularity of the education programme and attendance of the children shall be ensured.
(6) Children should be able to avail scholarships, grants and schemes and sponsorships.
37. Vocational Training.- (1) Every Child Care Institution shall provide gainful vocational
training to children according to their age, aptitude, interest and ability, both inside or outside the Child
Care Institution.
(2) Vocational training shall include occupational therapy, skill and interest based training, aimed at
suitable placement at the end of the course. The institute, preferably government recognised, providing
vocational training shall give a certificate, on the completion of the course.
(3) Where vocational training is offered outside the premises of the Child Care Institution, children shall
be escorted for such programmes with proper security planning and services, particularly for children who
are at risk.
(4) A record shall be maintained for all children attending the programmes and the progress made by
each child shall be reviewed. The report in that regard shall be submitted to the Board or the Committee or
the Children’s Court, as the case may be, on a quarterly basis.
38. Recreational Facilities.- (1) Recreational facilities may include indoor and outdoor games, yoga
and meditation, music, television, picnic and outings, cultural programmes, gardening and library, etc.
(2) Sufficient space shall be made available for outdoor sports and games.
(3) Picnic and outings may include education fair or science fair, museum, planetarium, botanical
garden, zoological garden, etc.
(4) Cultural event or sports competition shall be held once in a quarter to showcase talent on
festivals or on days of national festivals.
(5) Library shall have child friendly environment. There shall be books in regional language,
newspapers, children’s magazines, puzzle books, picture books, books in braille, audio and video
devices, etc.
(6) Space in the home shall be made available for gardening with technical input being given by a
gardener to the children.
(7) Music, dance and art therapy may be included in the list of recreational activities to enhance the
healing process of each child.
(8) Regularity of the activities shall be maintained with support of institutions and non-governmental
organisation, if needed and a report shall be submitted on quarterly basis to the Board or the Committee
or the Children’s Court, as the case may be.
39. Management Committee.- (1) Every Child Care Institution shall have a Management Committee
for the management of the institution and monitoring the progress of every child.
(2) In order to ensure proper care and treatment as per the individual care plans, children shall be
grouped on the basis of age, nature of offence or kind of care required, physical and mental health and
length of stay.
(3) The Management Committee shall comprise of:
(i) District Child Protection Officer (District Child Protection Unit)- Chairperson;
(ii) Person-in-charge - Member-Secretary;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 209
(iii) Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker – Member;
(iv) Medical Officer – Member;
(v) Psychologist or Counsellor – Member;
(vi) Workshop Supervisor or Vocational Instructor– Member;
(vii) Teacher – Member;
(viii) Social Worker Member of the Board or the Committee – Member;
(ix) two child representatives from each of the Children’s Committees – Members;
(x) any other special invitee with the consent of the Chairperson.
(4) The Management Committee shall meet at least once every month to consider and review:
(i) care in the institution, housing, area of activity and type of supervision or interventions required;
(ii) medical facilities and treatment;
(iii) food, water, sanitation and hygiene conditions;
(iv) mental health interventions;
(v) individual problems of children and institutional adjustment;
(vi) quarterly review of individual care plans;
(vii) provision of legal aid services;
(viii) vocational training and opportunities for employment;
(ix) education and life skills development programmes;
(x) social adjustment, recreation, group work activities, guidance and counselling;
(xi) progress, adjustment and modification of residential programmes to the needs of the children;
(xii) planning post-release or post-restoration rehabilitation programme and follow up for a period of two
years in collaboration with after care services, as the case may be;
(xiii) pre-release or pre-restoration preparation;
(xiv) release or restoration;
(xv) post release or post-restoration follow-up;
(xvi) minimum standards of care, including infrastructure and services available;
(xvii) daily routine;
(xviii) community participation and voluntary participation in the residential life of children such as
education, vocational activities, recreation and hobby;
(xix) all registers as required under the Act and the rules maintained by the institution, duly stamped and
signed and to check and verify the registers in the monthly review meetings;
(xx) matters concerning Children’s Committees; and
(xxi) any other matter which the Person-in-charge may like to bring up.
(5) The Management Committee shall set up a complaint and redressal mechanism in every institution
and a Children’s Suggestion Box shall be installed in every institution at a place easily accessible to children
away from the office set up and closer to the residence or rooms or dormitories of the children.
(6) The key of the Children’s Suggestion Box shall remain in the custody of the Chairperson of the
Management Committee and shall be checked every week by the Chairperson of the Management
Committee or his representative from District Child Protection Unit, in the presence of the members of the
Children’s Committees.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
210 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(7) If there is a problem or suggestion that requires immediate attention, the Chairperson of the
Management Committee shall call for an emergency meeting of the Management Committee to discuss and
take necessary action.
(8) The quorum for conducting emergency meetings shall be five members, including two members of
Children’s Committees, Chairperson of the Management Committee, Member of the Board or the
Committee, as the case may be, and the Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution.
(9) In the event of a serious allegation or complaint against the Person-in-charge of the institution, he
shall not be part of the emergency meeting and another available member of the Management Committee
shall be included in his place.
(10) All suggestions received through the suggestion box and action taken as a result of the decisions
made in the emergency meeting or action required to be taken shall be placed for discussion and review in
the monthly meeting of the Management Committee.
(11) A Children’s Suggestion Book shall be maintained in every institution where the complaints and
action taken by the Management Committee are duly recorded and such action and follow up shall be
communicated to the Children’s Committees after every monthly meeting of the Management Committee.
(12) The Board or Committee shall review the Children’s Suggestion Book at least once a month.
(13) The complaint box shall be accessible by the Chairperson of the Committee or any other person
authorised by him.
40. Children’s Committees.- (1) Person-in-charge of every institution for children shall facilitate the
setting up of children’s committees for different age groups of children, that is in the age group of 6 to 10
years, 11 to 15 years and 16 to 18 years and these children’s committees shall be constituted solely by
children.
(2) Such children’s committee shall be encouraged to participate in following activities:
(i) improvement of the condition of the institution;
(ii) reviewing the standards of care being followed;
(iii) preparing daily routine and diet scale;
(iv) developing educational, vocational and recreation plans;
(v) respecting each other and supporting each other in managing crisis;
(vi) reporting abuse and exploitation by peers and caregivers;
(vii) creative expression of their views through wall papers or newsletters or paintings or music or theatre;
(viii) management of institution through the Management Committee.
(3) The Person-in-charge shall ensure that the children’s committees meet every month and maintain a
register for recording their activities and proceedings, and place it before the Management Committee in
their monthly meetings.
(4) The Person-in-charge shall ensure that the children’s committees are provided with essential
support and materials including stationary, space and guidance for effective functioning.
(5) The Person-in-charge may, as far as feasible, seek assistance from local voluntary organisations or
child participation experts for the setting up and functioning of the children’s committees.
(6) The local voluntary organisation or child participation expert shall support the children’s committees
in the following:
(i) electing their leaders and in devising the procedure to be followed for conducting the elections;
(ii) conducting the elections and monthly meetings;
(iii) framing rules for the functioning of children’s committees and following it;
(iv) maintaining records and Children’s Suggestion Book and other relevant documents; and
(v) any other innovative activity.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 211
(7) The Management Committee shall seek a report from the Person-in-charge on the setting up and
functioning of the children’s committees, review these reports in their monthly meetings and take necessary
action or place the same before the Board or the Committee, wherever required.
41. Inspection.- (1) The State Government shall constitute State and district level inspection
committees.
(2) The State Inspection Committee shall comprise of a maximum of seven members from among the
State Government, namely the Board or Committee, the State Commission for the Protection of Child
Rights, the State Human Rights Commission, State Adoption Resource Agency, medical and other experts,
voluntary organisations and reputed social workers. The Member-Secretary, State Child Protection Society
shall be the Chairperson of the State Inspection Committee.
(3) The State Inspection Committee shall carry out inspections of the Child Care Institutions as defined
under sub-section (21) of section (2) of the Act housing children in the State in Form 46.
(4) The State Inspection Committee shall carry out random inspections of the institutions housing
children to determine whether such institution is housing children in need of care and protection.
(5) The State Inspection Committee shall submit report to the Secretary of the Department
implementing the Act.
(6) The State Inspection Committee shall make recommendations for improvement and development of
the Institutions in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and shall
forward the same to the State Child Protection Society or the District Child Protection Unit for appropriate
action.
(7) The State Inspection Committee shall interact with the children during visits to the institution to
determine their well-being and to get their feedback.
(8) The District Inspection Committee shall comprise of following members:
(i) Member of the Board or the Committee;
(ii) District Child Protection Officer as the Member Secretary;
(iii) Medical Officer;
(iv) one member of the civil society working in the area of child rights, care, protection and welfare;
(v) one mental health expert who has experience of working with children.
(9) The District Inspection Committee shall inspect all Child Care Institutions in the district in Form 46.
(10) The inspection of the facilities housing children in the district shall be carried out at least once every
three months.
(11) The District Inspection Committee shall submit the report of the findings to the District Child Protection
Unit or the State Government and shall also make suggestions for improvement and development of the
Child Care Institutions in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
(12) The District Inspection Committee shall interact with the children during the visits to the institution to
determine their well-being and to elicit their feedback.
(13) The District Child Protection Unit shall take necessary follow up action on the report of the District
Inspection Committee.
42. Evaluation.- (1) The evaluation of functioning of the Board, Committee, special juvenile police
units, registered institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons under the Act may be done by the
Central Government or the State Government once in three years through institutions and agencies such as
reputed academic institutions, schools of social work of Universities, Management Institutions, multi-
disciplinary Committee especially constituted for the purpose etc.
(2) The findings of the evaluation as per sub-rule (1) above shall be shared between the Central and
State Governments in order to strengthen and improve the functioning of different structures.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
212 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
CHAPTER VII
ADOPTION
43. Adoption Related Reporting.- (1) The Child Welfare Committees shall, furnish the data relating to
children declared legally free for adoption and cases pending for decision to the Authority online in the
formats provided in the Adoption Regulations and also to the respective State Adoption Resource Agencies,
with the assistance of the District Child Protection Units.
44. Children who are not being adopted after being declared legally free for adoption may be
eligible for Foster Care.- (1) The following categories of children may be considered for Foster Care in
following circumstances:
(i) Children in the age group of 0 to 6 years who are being considered by the Committee as legally free
for adoption and those who have been declared legally free for adoption shall not as far as possible be
considered for placement in foster care. Such children shall be provided a permanent family through
adoption as per Adoption Regulations.
(ii) If adoptable children between the age of 6 to 8 years do not get a family either in in-country adoption
or in inter-country adoption within a period of two years after they are declared legally free for adoption by
Child Welfare Committee, such children to be eligible to be placed in family foster care or group foster
care, as the case may be, by the Committee on the recommendation of District Child Protection Unit or
Specialised Adoption Agency.
(iii) Children in the age group of 8 to18 years, who are legally free for adoption but have not been
selected by any Prospective Adoptive Parent (PAP) for one year to be eligible to be placed in family foster
care or group foster care, as the case may be, by the Committee on the recommendation of District Child
Protection Unit or Specialised Adoption Agency.
(iv) Children with special needs, irrespective of the age, who do not get a family either in in-country
adoption or in inter-country adoption within a period of one year after they are declared legally free for
adoption by Child Welfare Committee, such children to be eligible to be placed in family foster care or
group foster care, as the case may be, by the Committee on the recommendation of District Child
Protection Unit or Specialised Adoption Agency, provided the Home Study Report of the foster family
supports their fitness and group setting has facilities for care of such children.
(v) Where the child has remained with a foster family for a minimum of five years other than in pre-
adoption foster care, the foster family may apply for adoption and shall be given preference to adopt the
child after the child has been declared legally free for adoption and after registering in Child Adoption
Resource Information and Guidance System and according to procedures laid down in Adoption
Regulations.
45. Procedure before the Court.- (1) The procedure for obtaining an Adoption Order from the court
concerned would be as provided in Adoption Regulations.
(2) The Court, for the purpose of an application for adoption order, shall not be bound by the procedure
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and Evidence Act, 1872. The procedure, as laid
down in the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and Adoption Regulations shall be
followed.
46. Period for disposal of applications.- (1) The Court shall dispose of an application for making an
adoption order within a period of two months from the date of filing of the application, as provided under
sub-section (2) of section 61 of the Act and where the judge of the court concerned ordinarily exercising
jurisdiction in such matters is not available for a period of more than one month, the applications shall be
disposed of within stipulated time by other senior most judge.
(2) No information or Court order regarding adoption disclosing the identity of the child shall be
uploaded on any portal except as may be stipulated in Adoption Regulations.
47. Special provision for protection of adopted children.-Any case of offence committed against
adopted child shall be dealt as per the law applicable to any other child.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 213
48. Linkage of Child Care Institutions to Specialised Adoption Agencies.-Linkage of Child Care
Institutions with Specialized Adoption Agencies for the purpose of adoption shall be governed by the
provisions of section 66 of the Act and Adoption Regulations.
49. Additional Functions of the Authority.-(1) The Authority shall perform the following functions, in
addition to the functions specified in sub-section (1) of section 68 of the Act, namely:
(i) receive applications of a non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or a foreigner living abroad
through authorised adoption agency or Central Authority or the Government Department concerned
or an Indian Diplomatic Mission and process the same in terms of sub-section (5) of section 59 of
the Act;
(ii) receive and process applications received from a foreigner or an overseas citizen of India residing in
India for one year or more, and who is interested in adopting a child from India in terms of sub-
section (12) of section 59 of the Act;
(iii) issue no-objection certificate in all cases of inter-country adoptions;
(iv) issue conformity certificate in the inter-country adoption cases under Article 23 of the 1993 Hague
Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-Country Adoption;
(v) intimate the immigration authorities of India and the receiving country of the child about the inter-
country adoption cases;
(vi) maintain Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System for transparency in the adoption
system;
(vii) provide support and guidance to State Adoption Resource Agencies, District Child Protection Units,
Specialised Adoption Agencies and other stakeholders of adoption and related matters, through
trainings, workshops, exposure visits, consultations, conferences, seminars and other capacity
building programmes;
(viii) coordinate with State Governments and the State Adoption Resource Agencies and advise them in
adoption related matters;
(ix) establish uniform standards and indicators, relating to-
(a) adoption procedure related to orphan, abandoned and surrendered children and also
related to relative adoptions;
(b) quality child care standards in specialised adoption agencies and child care institutions;
(c) monitoring and supervision of service providers;
(d) standardisation of documents in cases of adoptions;
(e) safeguards and ethical practices including online applications for facilitating hassle-free
adoptions.
(x) conduct research, documentation and publication on adoption related matters;
(xi) maintain a comprehensive centralised database relating to children and prospective adoptive parents
for the purpose of adoption in Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System;
(xii) maintain a confidential centralised database relating to children placed in adoption and adoptive
parents in the Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System;
(xiii) carry out advocacy, awareness and information, education, and communication activities for
promoting adoption either by itself or through its associated bodies;
(xiv) enter into bilateral agreements with foreign Central Authorities, wherever necessary under the
Hague Adoption Convention; and
(xv) authorise foreign adoption agencies to process applications of non-resident Indians or overseas
citizen of India or foreign prospective adoptive parents for inter-country adoption of Indian children.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
214 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
50. Terms and conditions of appointment of Members of the Steering Committee of the
Authority.- (1) A person for being selected or nominated as a member of the Steering Committee of the
Authority shall:
(i) be an Indian national;
(ii) not be below the age of twenty-five years and above the age of sixty years, and for the member who
is an adoptee as per clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 69 of the Act, the minimum age would be
twenty-one years;
(iii) not have been convicted or sentenced to imprisonment for an offence under any law for the time
being in force; and
(iv) not have been removed or dismissed from service of the Central or State Government or a body or
corporation owned or controlled by Central or State Government.
(2) The members in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 69 of the Act, shall be from different zones
on rotation basis.
(3) The zones and the States covered for the purpose of selection of the members of the Steering
Committee shall be as per the grouping made by Inter-State Council and North-Eastern Council from time to
time. The States not covered in any of the zonal councils shall be included in the zone having geographical
proximity.
(4) The member from the State Adoption Resource Agency would be selected from the State of the
zone under consideration on the basis of:
(i) number of inspections of Specialised Adoption Agencies conducted by the State Adoption Resource
Agency;
(ii) regularity in conducting the quarterly meetings of the Specialised Adoption Agencies and uploading of
the minutes of such meetings in the Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System;
(iii) level of data integrity maintained by the State Adoption Resource Agency among the Specialised
Adoption Agencies through the District Child Protection Units concerned;
(iv) capacity building of stakeholders as well as publicity awareness activities of State Adoption
Resource Agency for the promotion of adoption in the State; and
(v) level of coordination with other stakeholders in the State as well as with the Authority.
(5) The selected State Adoption Resource Agency would be represented in the Steering Committee by
the Secretary of the Department of the State Government dealing with adoption or his representative not
below the rank of Deputy Secretary or Joint Director of the State Government.
(6) The members of the Specialised Adoption Agencies would be selected as per the following criteria
available in the Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System and as per the record available
with the Authority:
(i) the number of children given in adoption;
(ii) performance and data integrity in the Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System;
(iii) follow-up of the progress of children placed in adoption;
(iv) record keeping and documentation;
(v) child care standards; and
(vi) no proven complaint of malpractice against the agency.
(7) The Specialised Adoption Agencies shall be represented by their President or Chairperson or
General Secretary or Secretary or Managing Trustee or Director or Manager, as the case may be.
(8) The selection of the member from the category of advocate or professor in family law shall be from
a combined panel of four names, with two names from each category, received from the National Legal
Services Authority.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 215
(9) The members of the Steering Committee, under clause (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) of section 69 of
the Act, shall be selected or nominated by a Committee comprising of:
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development as the Chairperson;
(ii) Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary in-charge of the Authority in the Ministry of Women and
Child Development as member;
(iii ) one external expert in the field of child protection as nominated by the Minister for Women and
Child Development, as member; and
(iv) Member Secretary of the Steering Committee, as the Member-Convener.
(10) The members of the Steering Committee other than ex-officio members shall be appointed with the
approval of the Minister for Women and Child Development.
(11) The tenure of the members of the Steering Committee, other than the ex-officio members shall be
two years from the date of appointment, unless the member resigns or is removed or attains the age of sixty
years.
(12) A non-ex-officio member shall not be eligible for a second term.
(13) In case of any vacancy, a new member will be nominated or selected for the remaining period of the
tenure from the same State from the same category.
(14) A non-ex-officio member of the Steering Committee of the Authority shall cease to be a member if:
(i) he resigns as a member, or
(ii) he ceases to hold the position by virtue of which he has been represented as a member; or
(iii) he is removed on the following grounds:
(a) on being adjudged as an insolvent, or
(b) is convicted of a criminal offence involving moral turpitude, or,
(c) fails to attend three consecutive meetings of the Steering Committee without the leave of the
Chairperson of the Steering Committee, or
(d) is found working against the objectives of the adoption programme, the interests of the Authority
and is found to be not following the regulations as applicable, or
(e) is found divulging any transaction of business or deliberations in the meetings of the Steering
Committee or any document or information circulated to them for the purpose, to media or any other
agency, without the prior approval or authorisation of the Chairperson, or
(f) is found accepting benefaction from any source that involves conditions or obligations that are
contrary to the mandates and objectives of the Authority.
(15) A non-ex-officio member other than State Adoption Resource Agency shall be entitled to a sitting
fee of Rs.1,000/- per sitting, for attending a meeting of the Steering Committee, travelling allowance in
economy class air fare, hotel accommodation and food bill as per the Central Government Rules.
51. Transaction of business of the Steering Committee of the Authority.- (1) The Steering
Committee of the Authority shall meet once in a month.
(2) The transaction of business of the Steering Committee may also be convened by circulation in
case of urgency and such transaction of business shall have the same effect as if it had been transacted
at a formal meeting.
(3) A meeting of the Steering Committee shall be convened by the Member- Secretary with the
approval of the Chairperson.
(4) The meeting notice shall be issued by the Member-Secretary at least seven working days before
the actual date of the meeting.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
216 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(5) An extra ordinary meeting of the Steering Committee may be convened by the Chairperson at
any time.
(6) Five members of the Steering Committee shall form the quorum for the meeting.
(7) The meeting shall be presided over by the Chairperson and in his absence, a member nominated
or designated by the Chairperson.
(8) All decisions in the Steering Committee shall be taken by majority of the members present
excluding the special invitees, if any.
(9) In case of tie, the Chairperson shall have the casting vote.
(10) The minutes of the meeting will be authenticated by the Member-Secretary after obtaining the
approval of the same by the Chairperson.
(11) Any other matter relating to the transaction of business of the Steering Committee shall be
governed by the procedure adopted by the Steering Committee, whenever required.
52. Annual Report of the Authority.- (1) The Chief Executive Officer or any other officer of the
Authority duly authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf shall cause to be prepared the annual
report of the Authority under sub-section (1) of section 71 of the Act on or before the 30th day of June
following the financial year to which that report relates.
(2) The annual report prepared under sub-rule (1) shall, after approval by the Steering Committee be
signed and authenticated by the Chief Executive Officer.
53. Accounts and audit of the Authority.- (1) The annual statement of accounts of the Authority for
every financial year shall be prepared by the Chief Executive Officer or such officer of the Authority as may
be authorised by the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf.
(2) The Authority shall forward to the Central Government quarterly reviews of expenditure incurred
and the expenditure likely to be incurred during the remaining part of the financial year.
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall supervise the maintenance of the accounts of the Authority, the
compilation of financial statement and returns and shall also ensure that all account books, connected
vouchers and other documents and papers of the Authority required by the office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General for the purpose of auditing the accounts of the Authority are placed at the disposal of that
office.
(4) The accounts of the Authority shall be maintained in the formats prescribed by the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India from time to time.
(5) The annual statement of accounts shall be signed and authenticated by the Chief Executive Officer.
(6) The annual statement of accounts of the Authority shall be submitted to the office of the Comptroller
and Auditor General on or before the 30th of June of the following year to which the accounts relate, which
shall audit the accounts of the Authority and submit the audit report.
(7) The Authority shall, within thirty days of the receipt of the audit report, remedy any defect or
irregularity pointed out therein, and submit its report to the Central Government and to the office of the
Comptroller and Auditor General about the action taken by it.
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN
54. Procedure in cases of offences against children.- (1) A complaint of an offence against a child
may be made by child, family, guardian, friend or teacher of the child, childline services or any other
individual or institutions or organisation concerned.
(2) On receipt of information in respect of a cognizable offence against a child, the police shall register
a First Information Report (FIR) forthwith.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 217
(3) On receipt of information of a non- cognizable offence against a child, the police shall make an
entry in the Daily Diary which shall be transmitted to the Magistrate concerned forthwith who shall direct
appropriate action under sub-section (2) of section 155 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(4) In all cases of offences against children, the investigation shall be conducted by the Child Welfare
Police Officer.
(5) Where any offence under the Act is committed by a Child Care Institution including a Specialised
Adoption Agency, the Committee or the Board as the case may be, may pass appropriate orders for placing
the children already placed with the Child Care Institution or the Specialised Adoption Agency in any other
Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency and recommending the cancellation of the registration
and withdrawal of recognition of such institution or agency.
(6) Where an FIR is registered against a person working with a Child Care Institution including
Specialised Adoption Agency for any offence under the Act and the rules, such a person shall be debarred
from working directly with the children during the pendency of the criminal case.
(7) Where a person has been dismissed from service or is convicted of an offence under the Act and
the rules, he shall stand disqualified from any further appointment.
(8) In no case a child shall be placed in a police lock-up or lodged in a jail.
(9) The child and his family shall be provided access to paralegal volunteers under the District Legal
Service Authority.
(10) An immediate need assessment of the child will be conducted in terms of the need for food,
clothing, emergency medical care, counselling, psychological support and the same shall be immediately
extended to the child at the police station.
(11) Where a child has been subjected to sexual abuse, the child may be referred to the nearest District
Hospital or One-Stop Crisis Centre, as the case may be, if locally available.
(12) Special children’s rooms may be designated in every Court Complex with facility for separate space
for children waiting and children who are giving their statement or interview; separate entrances, wherever
feasible; video-conferencing facilities for interacting with children, wherever possible; provision for
entertainment for children such as books, games, etc. Statements and interviews, other than during trial of
children who are, victims, or witnesses, shall be recorded through child friendly procedure in a children’s
room.
(13) The statement or the interview of the victim/ witness child shall be conducted while ensuring the
following conditions:
(i) The Magistrate shall record the statement of the child under section 164 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 in the Children’s room or, if possible in the child’s place of residence including, home or
institution where he or she is residing.
(ii) The statement shall be recorded verbatim as spoken by the child.
(iii) The statement may also be recorded by audio-visual means as per the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(iv) The child may be accompanied by parent or guardian or social worker.
(14) The Legal Services Authority may provide a support person or para legal volunteer for pre-trial
counselling and to accompany the child for recording of the statement who shall also familiarize the child
with the Court and Court environment in advance, and where the child is found to have been disturbed by
the experience of coming to the Court, orders for video-conferencing may be passed by the Court, on an
application moved by the support person or para-legal volunteer or by the Legal Services Authority, on
behalf of the child.
(15) If the child victim or witness does not belong to the District or State or Country, the statement or
interview or deposition of the child may also be recorded through video conferencing.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
218 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(16) Where video-conferencing is not possible, all necessary accommodation, travel expenses for the
child and a guardian accompanying the child will be provided as per actuals by the State Government or
Union Territory Administration.
(17) Separate rooms for vulnerable witnesses may be designated in every Court Complex to record the
evidence of child witnesses.
(18) During a trial involving children, as far as possible, the following norms may be followed to ensure a
child-friendly atmosphere:
(i) Parents or guardian(s) shall accompany the child at all times (only if it is in the best interest of the
child). If the said person has a conflict of interest, another person of the child’s choice, or fit person, or
representative of the fit institution identified, or psychologist appointed by the Committee or Court, shall
accompany the child at all times, on approval of the Court.
(ii) Psychological counselling may also be provided to the child wherever necessary.
(iii) In a situation where parents or guardians may have been involved in the commission of the crime,
or where the child is living in a place where the child is at risk of further trauma, and the same is brought to
the notice of the Court, or the Court on its own motion shall direct the child to be taken out of the custody
or care, or out of such situation and the child should be immediately produced before the Committee.
(iv) For the age determination of the victim, in relation to offences against children under the Act, the
same procedures mandated for the Board and the Committee under section 94 of the Act to be followed.
(v) The language(s) used to be familiar to the child and if needed translators and special educators to
be made available.
(vi) Before the statement of the child is recorded, the Court to ensure that the child is capable of making
a voluntary statement.
(vii) No statement of the child to be disregarded as evidence in the trial solely on the basis of the age of
the child.
(viii) Images or statements admissible in the interview of the child not to be detrimental to the mental or
physical well- being of the child.
(ix) Length and questions admissible at the interview not to be taxing and to be suitable to the attention
span of the child.
(x) In case of young children, or otherwise incapacitated child, alternative methods of interaction and
evidence collection that is less intimidating to be adopted.
(xi) The Court to ensure that at no stage during trial, the child comes face to face with the accused.
(xii) Special permission from school and arrangement for remedial classes for days lost to be ensured by
the school authorities.
(19) The child may be represented, as the case may be, by:
(i) a lawyer of his choice, or,
(ii) public prosecutor, or,
(iii) a lawyer designated or empanelled by the Legal Services Authority.
(20) All functionaries of the Court and others concerned may be sensitised on the special needs of
children and child rights.
(21) After the process of trial:
(i) The child or guardian should be informed of the decision of the judicial proceeding and its implication.
(ii) The child or guardian should be made aware of his legal options.
55. Procedure in case of offence under section 75 of the Act.- (1) For the purposes of section 75 of
the Act and this rule, giving a child in marriage shall be considered as cruelty to the child. On receipt of

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 219
information of risk of a child being given in marriage, the police or any officer authorised under the Act or
under the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act,2006 (6 of 2007), shall produce the child before the Committee
for appropriate directions and rehabilitative measures.
(2) Where an act of cruelty to a child takes place in a Child Care Institution, or a school, or in any other
place of care and protection to the child, considering the best interest of the child, the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court after consultation with the child and or parents or guardians shall provide
alternative rehabilitation for the child.
(3) A child covered under the Act requiring immediate medical attention shall be provided with required
medical care and treatment by a hospital or clinic or facility upon a direction of the Board or the Committee
made in this regard, free of cost. A failure to respond immediately resulting in serious injury, irreversible
damage or threat to life or death shall be deemed to be wilful neglect of the child and shall tantamount to
cruelty under section 75 of the Act on the direction of the Board or the Committee after a detailed inquiry.
56. Procedure in case of offence under section 77 of the Act.-(1) Whenever a child is found to be
under the influence of, or in possession of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances
or tobacco products, including for the purpose of sale, the police shall enquire as to how the child came
under the influence of, or possession of such intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances or tobacco products and shall register an FIR forthwith.
(2) The child who has been administered narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or is found under
the influence of the same may be produced either before the Board or the Committee as the case may be,
and the Board or the Committee shall pass appropriate orders regarding rehabilitation and de-addiction of
the child.
(3) In case of a child found to be addicted to intoxicating liquor or tobacco products, the child shall be
produced before the Committee which shall pass directions for rehabilitation including de-addiction of the
child and transfer the child to a fit facility identified for the purpose.
(4) In case any child is found to have been administered intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances or tobacco products in a Child Care Institution, the child shall be produced
immediately before the Board or the Committee, except in such cases where the child is not in a position to
be produced before the Board or the Committee and requires immediate medical attention.
(5) The Board, shall on its own or on complaint received from the Committee, issue directions to the
police to register an FIR immediately.
(6) The Board or the Committee shall also issue appropriate directions for inquiry as to the
circumstances in which such product entered the Child Care Institution and reached the child and shall
recommend appropriate action against the erring officials and the Child Care Institution.
(7) The Board or the Committee may also issue directions for transfer of the child to another Child Care
Institution as the case may be.
(8) Any shop selling intoxicating liquor, tobacco products, must display a message at a prominent place
on their shop that giving or selling intoxicating liquor or tobacco products to a child is a punishable crime
with upto seven years of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of upto one lakh rupees.
(9) All tobacco products and intoxicating liquor must display a message that giving or selling intoxicating
liquor or tobacco products to a child is a punishable crime with upto seven years of rigorous imprisonment
and a fine of upto one lakh rupees.
(10) Giving or selling of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or tobacco
products within 200 meters of a Child Care Institution or any other home registered or recognised under the
Act, or the office of a Committee or a Board shall be deemed to be an offence under section 77 of the Act.
57. Procedure in case of offence under section 78 of the Act.- (1) Whenever a child is found to be
vending, carrying, supplying or smuggling an intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance,
the police shall enquire how and from whom the child came into possession of the intoxicating liquor,
narcotic drug, or psychotropic substance and shall register an FIR forthwith.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
220 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) A child who is alleged to have committed an offence under section 78 of the Act shall be
produced before the Board, which may transfer the child to the Committee, if the child is also in need of
care and protection.
58. Procedure in case of offence under section 80 of the Act.-(1) Where any orphan, abandoned or
surrendered child, is offered or given or received for the purpose of adoption without following the
procedures as provided in the Act and the rules, the police shall, suomotu, or on receipt of information in
that regard register an FIR forthwith.
(2) A child who has been so offered, given or received for the purpose of adoption shall be produced
before the Committee forthwith which shall pass appropriate directions for rehabilitation of the child,
including placing such child in a Specialised Adoption Agency.
(3) Wherever any offence under section 80 of the Act is committed by a recognised Specialised
Adoption Agency or by a person associated with such an agency, the Committee may also pass appropriate
orders for placing the other children placed with the Specialised Adoption Agency in any other Child Care
Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency.
59. Procedure in case of offence under section 81 of the Act.- (1) On receipt of information about
the selling or buying of a child, the police shall register an FIR forthwith.
(2) Giving or agreeing to give, receiving or agreeing to receive any payment or reward in consideration
of adoption, except as permitted under the adoption regulations framed by the Authority, towards the
adoption fees or service charge or child care corpus by any prospective adoptive parent(s) or parent or
guardian of the child or the Specialised Adoption Agency shall amount to an offence under section 81 of the
Act and this rule.
(3) A child, who has been subjected to buying or selling, shall be produced before the Committee
forthwith which shall pass appropriate orders for the rehabilitation of the child.
(4) Where any offence under section 81 of the Act is committed by a parent or a guardian of the child
or any other person having actual charge or custody of the child, the Committee shall pass appropriate
orders for placing the child in a Child Care Institution or fit institution or with a fit person, as the case may
be.
(5) Where any offence under section 81 of the Act is committed by a Child Care Institution including
Specialised Adoption Agency or by a hospital or nursing home or maternity home, or a person associated
with such an institution or agency, the Committee may also pass appropriate orders for placing the other
children placed with such Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency or hospital or nursing home
or maternity home in any other Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency or hospital or nursing
home or maternity home, as the case may be.
(6) The Committee shall recommend to the State Government that the registration or recognition of
such agency or institution or the registration or license of such a hospital or nursing home or maternity
home or such associated person under any law for the time being in force shall also be withdrawn.
60. Procedure in case of offence under section 82 of the Act.- (1) A complaint of subjecting a child
to corporal punishment under section 82 of the Act may be made by the child or any one on his behalf.
(2) Every Child Care Institution shall have a complaint box at a prominent place in the building to
receive complaints of corporal punishment.
(3) The complaint box will be opened in the presence of a representative of the District Child Protection
Unit once a month.
(4) All such complaints shall be forthwith presented before the Judicial Magistrate of First Class nearest
to the Child Care Institution and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Board or the Committee.
(5) The Judicial Magistrate shall get the case investigated by the Child Welfare Police Officer
concerned and take appropriate measures on receipt of a complaint.
(6) The Board or the Committee may consider transferring the child to another Child Care Institution in
the best interest of the child who has made the complaint or who has been subjected to corporal
punishment.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 221
(7) Where the Judicial Magistrate First Class finds that the management of the institution is not
cooperating with the inquiry or complying with the orders of the court under sub-section (3) of section 82 of
the Act, the Judicial Magistrate First Class will either take cognizance of the offence himself or direct the
registration of FIR and proceed against the person in-charge of the management of the institution.
(8) Where the Board or the Committee or the State Government issues any directions to the
management of the institution in respect of any incident of corporal punishment in the child care institution,
the management shall comply with the same.
(9) In the event of non-compliance, the Board on its own or on the complaint of the Committee or the
State Government shall direct the registration of an FIR under sub-section (3) of section 82 of the Act.
(10) Where a person has been dismissed from service or debarred from working directly with children or
is convicted of an offence of subjecting a child to corporal punishment under sub-section (2) of section 82 of
the Act, he shall stand disqualified from any further appointment under the Act and the rules.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
61. Duties of the Person-in-charge of a Child Care Institution.- (1) The primary responsibility of the
Person-in-charge is of maintaining the Child Care Institution and of providing care and protection to the
children.
(2) The Person-in-charge shall stay within the premises to be readily available as and when required by
the children or the staff and in case where an accommodation is not available in the premises, he shall stay
at a place in close proximity to the Child Care Institution till such time such accommodation is made
available within the premises of the Child Care Institution.
(3) The general duties and functions of the Person-in-charge shall include, to:-
(i) ensure compliance with the provisions of the Act and the rules and orders made thereunder;
(ii) ensure compliance with the orders of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court;
(iii) provide homely and enabling atmosphere of love, affection, care and concern for children;
(iv) strive for the development and welfare of the children;
(v) supervise and monitor discipline and well-being of the children and the staff;
(vi) plan, implement and coordinate all activities, programmes and operations, including training and
treatment programmes or correctional activities as the case may be;
(vii) segregate a child suffering from contagious or infectious diseases on the advice of the medical
officer of the institution;
(viii) segregate a child wherever required;
(ix) ensure observance and follow-up of daily routine activities;
(x) organize local and national festivals in the home;
(xi) organize trips or excursions or picnics for children;
(xii) send a list of children in Form 40 in the Child Care Institution to the Board or the Committee, as the
case may be, every week and bring to the notice of the Board or the Committee, if no date is given
for the production of any child before the Board or the Committee;
(xiii) allocate duties to personnel;
(xiv) maintain standards of care in the Child Care Institution;
(xv) ensure proper storage and inspection of food stuffs as well as food served;
(xvi) maintain the buildings and premises of the Child Care Institution;
(xvii) maintain proper hygiene in the home;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
222 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(xviii) provide accident and fire preventive measures, disaster management within the premises and also
keep first aid kit;
(xix) make stand-by arrangements for water storage, power back-up, inverters, generators;
(xx) ensure careful handling of equipment;
(xxi) employ appropriate security measures;
(xxii) conduct periodical inspections, including daily inspection and rounds of the Child Care Institutions;
(xxiii) take prompt action to meet emergencies;
(xxiv) ensure prompt, firm and considerate handling of all disciplinary matters;
(xxv) ensure proper and timely maintenance of the case files;
(xxvi) maintain all records and registers required under the Act and these rules;
(xxvii) prepare the budget and maintain control over financial matters;
(xxviii) organise the meetings of the Management Committee set up under rule 39 of these rules and
provide necessary support;
(xxix) ensure monthly verification of all records and registers by the Management Committee set up under
rule 39 of the rules;
(xxx) liaise, co-ordinate and co-operate with the State Child Protection Society and the District Child
Protection Unit as and when required;
(xxxi) co-ordinate with the legal cum Probation Officer in the District Child Protection Unit or the District or
State Legal Services Authority to ensure that every child is legally represented and provided free
legal aid and other necessary support.
(xxxii) ensure the production of the child before the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court on the
date of such production and to ensure that the dates for the said purpose are recorded.
(4) The Person-in-charge shall inspect the Child Care Institution as often as possible but not less than
twice a day. He shall make a record of the timings of his inspection and also note his observations in a
separate book maintained for the purpose, especially with regard to:
(i) maintenance of hygiene and sanitation,
(ii) maintenance of order,
(iii) quality and quantity of food,
(iv) hygienic maintenance of food articles and other supplies,
(v) hygiene in the medical centre and provisions for medical care,
(vi) behaviour of the children and staff,
(vii) security arrangements, and
(viii) maintenance of files, registers and books.
(5) Anything irregular that comes to the notice of the Person-in-charge shall be enquired into and
resolved and the date, time and nature of the action taken shall be noted in the book.
(6) Where a problem of urgent nature has not been resolved within two working days, the Board or the
Committee or the District Child Protection Unit shall be informed.
(7) In case the Person-in-charge is on leave or otherwise not available, the duties of the Person-in-
charge shall be performed by the Child Welfare Officer as designated by the Person-in-charge.
62. Duties of the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker.- (1) Every Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker
in the Child Care Institution shall carry out all directions given by the Board or the Committee or the
Children’s Court.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 223
(2) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall establish linkages with voluntary workers and
organisations to facilitate rehabilitation and social re-integration of the children and to ensure the necessary
follow up.
(3) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker available in the Child Care Institution at the time of
receiving a child shall interact with the child received with a view to put the child at ease and befriend him
and shall supervise the process of receiving of the child.
(4) On receipt of information from the police or Child Welfare Police Officer or on arrival of a child in the
Child Care Institution, the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall forthwith conduct social investigation
of the child through personal interviews with the child and his family members, social agencies and other
sources, inquire into antecedents and family history of the child and collect such other material as may be
relevant, and submit the Social Investigation Report to the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court,
within fifteen days.
(5) All the children in the Child Care Institution shall be assigned to a Child Welfare Officer or Case
Worker and such Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall be responsible for the child assigned to him in
all respects viz. care and development of the child, reporting to the Board or the Committee or the
Children’s Court about the child or maintaining the child’s record in the Child Care Institution.
(6) Upon assignment of the child to a Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker, the Child Welfare Officer
or Case Worker shall:
(i) Prepare the case file of the child;
(ii) Maintain the Protective Custody Card;
(iii) Prepare and maintain the medical record of the child and ensure that the treatment of the child is
not interrupted or neglected;
(iv) Meet the child every day to ensure his safety, welfare and development; assist the child to adjust to
the life in the Child Care Institution. A newly received child shall be met more often than once a day;
(v) Gather information about the child within the initial five days to ascertain the child’s education,
vocational status and aptitude and emotional status;
(vi) Have the necessary medical or mental tests, assessments and examinations of the child
conducted;
(vii) Study the reports and prepare in consultation with the child and his family members, an individual
care plan for the child in Form 7 for the period pending inquiry, to be placed in the case file of the
child. The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker may consult the counsellor, psychologists or such
other person as he deems fit in this regard;
(viii) In keeping with the individual care plan, a daily routine shall be developed for the child and
explained to him;
(ix) Ensure that the child adheres to the routine activities so developed and take timely reports from the
caregivers in this respect;
(x) Review periodically the implementation and effectiveness of the individual care plan and if
necessary, suitably modify the individual care plan in Form 7 and/or the routine activities of the
child with the approval of the Management Committee;
(xi) Resolve the problems of the child and deal compassionately with their difficulties in life in the Home;
(xii) Participate in the orientation, monitoring, education, vocational and rehabilitation programmes in
respect of the child and attend parent teacher meetings in schools in respect of children assigned to
them;
(xiii) Attend proceedings of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court and furnish all
information and file all reports that may be called for;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
224 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(xiv) On receiving the copy of the order of declaration of age, to make the necessary changes in the
record as regards the age of the child if any change is required and to place the copy of the said
order in the case file of the child;
(xv) Participate in the pre-release programme and help the child to establish contact which can provide
emotional and social support to the child after the release;
(xvi) Maintain contact with the children after their release and extend help and guidance to them;
(xvii) Visit regularly the residence of the child under their supervision and also places of employment or
school attended by such child and submit fortnightly reports or as otherwise directed;
(xviii) Accompany the child wherever possible from the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court to
Child Care Institution as the case may be;
(xix) Maintain record of the next date of production of the child before the Board or the Committee or the
Children’s Court or for medical treatment and ensure the production of the child before the Board or
the Committee or the Children’s Court or for medical treatment on the said date;
(xx) Maintain the registers as may be specified from time to time;
(xxi) Any other duty assigned by the Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution.
(7) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker who has been assigned the duty of verifying the daily
cleaning in the premises of Child Care Institution shall do so twice a day, one after the morning cleaning
and the other after the evening cleaning. The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall make a note of the
same in the House-keeping register.
(8) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker who has been assigned the duty of verifying the daily
cooking shall make a note of the same in the Meals Register, in respect of every meal.
63. Duties of the House Mother or House Father.- (1) Every house father or house mother shall abide
by the directions of the Person-in-charge.
(2) The general duties, functions and responsibilities of a house father or house mother shall be as
follows:
(i) handle every child in the Child Care Institution with love and affection;
(ii) take proper care of the child and ensure his welfare;
(iii) provide each child upon his reception with all necessary supplies like clothing, toiletries and such
other items required for daily usage.;
(iv) replenish the provisions or supplies as per scale and need of the child;
(v) maintain discipline among the children;
(vi) ensure that the children maintain personal cleanliness and hygiene;
(vii) look after maintenance, sanitation and maintain hygienic surroundings;
(viii) implement the daily routine of every child in an effective manner and ensure the participation of
the children;
(ix) look after safety and security arrangements in the Child Care Institution;
(x) escort the children whenever they go out of the Child Care Institution for purposes other than
production before the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court;
(xi) report to the Person-in-charge and to the Child Welfare Officer about the child assigned to the
Child Welfare Officer;
(xii) maintain the registers, relevant to their duties; and
(xiii) any other duty as may be assigned by the Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 225
64. Duties of a Probation Officer.- (1) On receipt of information from the Police or Child Welfare
Police Officer under clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Act, without waiting for any formal
order from the Board, the Probation Officer shall inquire into the circumstances of the child as may have
bearing on the inquiry by the Board and submit a social investigation report in Form 6 to the Board.
(2) The social investigation report should provide for risk assessment, including aggravating and
mitigating factors highlighting the circumstances which induced vulnerability such as traffickers or abusers
being in the neighbourhood, adult gangs, drug users, accessibility to weapons and drugs, exposure to age
inappropriate behaviours, information and material.
(3) The Probation Officer shall carry out the directions given by the Board and shall have the following
duties, functions and responsibilities:
(i) To conduct social investigation of the child in Form 6;
(ii) To attend the proceedings of the Board and the Children’s Court and to submit reports as and when
required;
(iii) To clarify the problems of the child and deal with their difficulties in institutional life;
(iv) To participate in the orientation, monitoring, education, vocational and rehabilitation programmes;
(v) To establish co-operation and understanding between the child and the Person- in-charge;
(vi) To assist the child to develop contacts with family and also provide assistance to family members;
(vii) To participate in the pre-release programme and help the child to establish contacts which could
provide emotional and social support to the child after release;
(viii) To establish linkages with Probation Officers in other Districts and States for obtaining social
investigation report, supervision and follow-up.
(ix) To establish linkages with voluntary workers and organisations to facilitate rehabilitation and social
reintegration of children and to ensure the necessary follow-up;
(x) Regular post release follow-up of the child extending help and guidance, enabling and facilitating
their return to social mainstreaming;
(xi) To prepare the individual care plan and post release plan for the child;
(xii) To supervise children placed on probation as per the individual care plan;
(xiii) To make regular visits to the residence of the child under his supervision and places of employment
or school attended by such child and submit periodic reports as per Form 10;
(xiv) To accompany children where ever possible, from the office of the Board to the observation home,
special home, place of safety or fit facility as the case may be;
(xv) To evaluate the progress of the children in place of safety periodically and prepare the report
including psycho-social and forward the same to the Children’s Court;
(xvi) To discharge the functions of a monitoring authority where so appointed by the Children’s Court;
(xvii) To maintain a diary or register to record his day to day activities such as visits made by him, social
investigation reports prepared by him, follow up done by him and supervision reports prepared by
him;
(xviii) To identify alternatives of community services and to establish linkages with voluntary sector for
facilitating rehabilitation and social reintegration of children; and
(xix) Any other task as may be assigned.
65. Rehabilitation-cum-Placement Officer.- (1) A Rehabilitation-cum- Placement Officer shall be
designated in all Child Care Institutions, including place of safety.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
226 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(2) The Rehabilitation-cum-Placement Officer may have a Masters Degree in Social Work or Human
Resource Management and at least three years experience in the field of rehabilitation, employment
creation and resource mobilisation.
(3) The Rehabilitation-cum- Placement Officer to perform the following functions:
(i) Identify the skills and aptitude of the children placed in Child Care Institutions through appropriate
mechanism and in consultation with the Child Welfare Officer, Case Worker, Counsellor and
Vocational instructor;
(ii) Identify and develop linkages with all such agencies that offer vocational and training services with
job placement at the end of the course;
(iii) Network with persons, corporates, recognised non-governmental organisations and other funding
agencies to mobilise resources for sponsoring training program and support for self-employment;
(iv) Facilitate and coordinate with agencies, individuals, corporates, recognised non-governmental
organisations and other funding agencies to set up vocational training units or workshops in Child
Care Institutions as per age, aptitude, interest and ability;
(v) Mobilise voluntary vocational instructors who render services to carry out the training sessions in
the Child Care Institutions;
(vi) Inculcate entrepreneurial skills and facilitate financial and marketing support for self-employment;
(vii) Prepare rehabilitation plans keeping in mind the nature of the offence and the personality traits of
the child;
(viii) Maintain the Rehabilitation Card in Form 14 and monitor the progress made by the child on
regular basis and submit such progress reports to the Management Committee;
(ix) Facilitate the child to get certificates on completion of the education or vocational training courses;
(x) Make efforts for ensuring effective placement of each eligible and trained child;
(xi) Organise workshops on Rehabilitation programmes and services available under Central and State
Government Schemes, spread awareness and facilitate access to such schemes and services;
(xii) Organise workshops on personality development, life skill development, coping skills and stress
management and other soft skills to encourage the child to become a productive and responsible
citizen; and
(xiii) Conduct regular visits to the agencies where the children are placed to monitor their progress and
provide any other assistance as may be required.
66. Staff Discipline.- (1) Any dereliction of duty, violation of rules and orders shall be viewed seriously
and strict disciplinary action shall be taken or recommended by the Person-in-charge against the erring
officials.
(2) No staff of the Child Care Institution shall be present at an unauthorised location within the Child
Care Institution.
(3) No staff of the Child Care Institution shall bring any prohibited article into the Institution.
(4) No staff of the Child Care Institution shall consume any addictive substances like liquor, bidi,
cigarette, tobacco or any other psychotropic substance within the premises of the Child Care Institution,
whether on duty at the relevant time or not or shall report for duty under the influence of any intoxicating
substance.
(5) No staff of the Child Care Institution shall sell or let for gain any article to any child or have any
business dealings with such child or his parent or guardian.
(6) No staff of the Child Care Institution shall use any abusive or vulgar language or discuss age-
inappropriate topics or watch pornographic material or read obscene literature in the premises of the Child
Care Institution.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 227
67. Security measures.- (1) Adequate number of security personnel shall be engaged in every Child Care
Institution keeping in mind the category of children housed in the Child Care Institution, age group of
children and the purpose of the Child Care Institution and the risk factor to and from the child.
(2) While engaging security personnel, preference shall be given to ex-servicemen recruited through
the Directorate General of Resettlement or agencies recommended by them.
(3) In Child Care Institutions housing girls, female security guards would be provided for the security
inside the Child Care Institution and male security guards may be engaged for the security of the Child Care
Institution from outside.
(4) Security personnel should also be available in reserve for any emergency situation.
(5) The Person-in-charge shall ensure that appropriate security measures are employed at all times,
including the following:
(i) There shall be sufficient number of guards at all times in different shifts to be posted at the points to
be identified by the Person-in-charge in consultation with security in-charge and the Department.
(ii) Any child, who complains of a medical problem or any other problem at night, shall report to the
caregiver concerned. The caregiver shall take such necessary steps as may be required and in
case of emergency shall inform the medical officer concerned or the Person-in-charge as the need
may be, who shall immediately take appropriate steps.
(iii) A duty roster shall be prepared and displayed at some prominent place in the premises of the Child
Care Institution by the Person-in-charge.
(6) Every caregiver or other staff of the Home, if he comes to know of any incident or probability of
unrest amongst the children, shall bring the same to the notice of the Person-in-charge without any loss of
time, who shall take necessary steps as the situation demands and shall inform the Board or the Committee
of such information or incident as well as the steps taken by him, in writing.
(7) The Person-in-charge shall make surprise visits to the Child Care Institution during the night as
frequently as possible, but not less than once a week. He shall make a record of the timings of his visit and
also note his observations in the register maintained by him in that regard.
(8) In a case of disturbance outside the Child Care Institution, the shift in-charge shall immediately
inform the police station concerned.
(9) In a case of violence or disturbance inside the Child Care Institution, the shift in-charge shall take
assistance of the police with the permission of the Person-in-charge. The shift in-charge shall first issue a
warning to the children.
(10) In case of a natural disaster or fire or any such calamity, the shift in-charge shall take suitable steps
for evacuation and safety of the children as per the Disaster Management Protocol as developed by the
State Disaster Management Authority for Child Care Institutions.
(11) To prepare the officers, children and guards to follow the above steps, a practice drill shall be held
once a month, without previous notice by the Person-in-charge.
(12) Closed Circuit Television cameras may be installed at all key points such as all entry and exit points
to the Child Care Institution, reception, corridors, kitchen, pantry or store room, dormitories, entry and exit
points of the washrooms with due regard to the privacy and dignity of the children.
(13) Adequate number of scanners and metal detectors may be provided in every Child Care Institution.
68. Searches and Seizures.- (1) The Person-in-charge or other authorised functionary of the Home
may conduct searches if required, and seize prohibited articles, if found.
(2) The procedure in case of seizures shall be as under:
(i) any prohibited article found during the search, shall be seized by the Person-in-charge and a list of
such seizure prepared;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
228 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ii) in case of arms, weapons, articles capable of being used as weapons or tools for criminal activities
or addictive substances being found from a child or dormitory, the Person-in-charge shall conduct
an inquiry to ascertain the presence of such articles and the persons responsible for such act;
(iii) the Person-in-charge shall furnish his report in this respect to the police and inform the Board or the
Committee at the earliest;
(iv) the Board may initiate appropriate action upon such report or on the report forwarded by the
Committee for disposal of the seized articles;
(v) the State Government shall take appropriate action against the person responsible, if such person is
an officer of the Child Care Institution or against the agency through whom the said person has
been engaged or the Child Care Institution;
(vi) the child responsible shall be dealt with in accordance with the Act and the rules made thereunder.
(3) All the articles seized shall be destroyed or disposed of having regard to the nature of the articles,
on the orders of the competent court, after being satisfied that the seized articles are not required in any
inquiry or departmental action against any officer or in any criminal investigation and proceedings.
69. Institutional Management of Children.-
A. (1) Every child shall be received by the Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution or such other
official duly authorised by the Person-in-charge to receive a child, referred to as the Receiving Officer.
(2) The Receiving Officer shall satisfy himself as regards the identity of the child and in case of any
doubt, the Receiving Officer shall promptly inform the Person-in-charge who shall forthwith inform the Board
or the Committee and produce the child before the Board or the Committee without any delay.
B. Types of Stay at the Child Care Institution.- (1) In case of children in conflict with law, there are
three types of stay of children at the Child Care Institution:
(i) protective custody;
(ii) overnight protective stay;
(iii) rehabilitation stay.
(2) In case of children in need of care and protection, there are two types of stay of children at the Child
Care Institution:
(i) overnight protective stay;
(ii) rehabilitation stay.
C. Protective Custody.- (1) A Protective Custody Card in Form 41 duly signed by the Board or
a custody warrant duly signed by the Children’s Court is required for such stay.
(2) Duration of such stay shall be as directed by the Board or the Children’s Court and as extended
from time to time by them.
(3) Such a stay shall be during the pendency of the inquiry.
D. Overnight Protective Stay.- (1) The purpose of the stay is to provide shelter to the child and
prevent his being kept overnight at the police station or at any other unsuitable place by providing an
alternative.
(2) Such stay may be only after 20:00 hrs in the night and till14:00 hrs on the following day.
(3) A child shall be permitted to stay at the Child Care Institution for one night on an application
seeking overnight protective stay of the child moved by the Child Welfare Police Officer in writing to the
Receiving Officer. The application shall be accompanied with a copy of the relevant documents showing the
circumstances in which the child was apprehended or found and the medical condition of the child.
(4) Upon being satisfied about the identity of the child, the child may be received by the Receiving
Officer and Form 42 shall be filled in triplicate. One copy of the form shall be retained as record of the Child

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 229
Care Institution, one copy shall be handed over to the Child Welfare Police Officer and the third copy shall
be forwarded to the Board or the Committee concerned for their record.
(5) The child shall be handed over to the charge of the Child Welfare Police Officer the next day at the
time stated in the form under receipt by the said Child Welfare Police Officer in the copy of the form.
(6) In case of the Child Welfare Police Officer not taking the charge of the child at the designated time,
the child shall be produced before the Board concerned or the Committee by the Person-in-charge of the
Child Care Institution with a report stating such fact.
(7) The particulars of the child shall be entered in the admission and discharge register, noting that the
child has been received for overnight protective stay.
(8) The child shall be searched physically and all his personal belongings, if any that are found, shall be
handed over to the Child Welfare Police Officer who has produced the child and who shall seize the articles
and furnish a copy of such seizure to the Receiving Officer.
(9) The child shall be provided food to eat and drink, if the child is hungry, irrespective of the time of
receiving such child.
(10) The child shall be placed for the night in the reception dormitory or the segregation unit as the case
may be.
E. Rehabilitation Stay.- (1) A child may be sent to the Children’s Home by the Committee for
such a stay and to the special home or the place of safety by the Board or the Children’s Court.
(2) The child shall be issued the Rehabilitation Card in Form 14 which shall state the duration of stay of
the child, unless the duration is shortened by a specific order in that respect by the Board or the Committee
or the Children’s Court.
F. Procedure to be adopted at the time of receiving the child.- (1) The Receiving Officer shall
follow the following procedure at the time the child is received:
(i) a full personal description of the child shall be entered in the admission and discharge register. In
case of rehabilitation stay, the date of release of the child shall also be noted;
(ii) the child shall be searched after explaining the requirements and the process, and with due regard
to decency and dignity and all the personal belongings shall be dealt with as stated in rule 72 of
these rules. A girl child shall be searched only by a female member of the staff;
(iii) the child shall be provided food to eat and drink if the child is hungry, irrespective of the time of
receiving such child;
(iv) the child shall be provided medical care in case of ill-health, injury, mental ailment, disease or
addiction requiring immediate attention;
(v) the child shall be segregated in specially earmarked dormitory or ward or hospital in case he is
suspected to be suffering from contagious or infectious disease requiring special care and caution;
(vi) the child shall be asked about any immediate and urgent needs like appearing in an examination or
interview, contacting family members. A note of the same or of the fact that no such need is present
shall be made by the Receiving Officer and put up before the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker
to whom the child is assigned. The said note shall be placed in the case file of the child.
(2) Every child received in the Child Care Institution shall be kept for the first fourteen days of his stay
in the reception dormitory made specifically for the purpose or the segregation unit, so that the child adjust
to the life in the Child Care Institution.
G. Procedure to be adopted after the child is received.- (1) The following procedure shall be
adopted on the same day or the next day if the child is received in the night:
(i) photograph of the child shall be taken. One photograph shall be kept in the case file of the child and
another shall be fixed on the index card with the particulars of the child. A copy shall be kept in an album
serially numbered and a copy of the photograph shall be sent to the Board or the Committee as well as
to the District Child Protection Unit and be uploaded on the designated portal set up for the purpose;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
230 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ii) the child may have a bath and be provided fresh clothes. The caregiver shall issue the child toiletry
items, new sets of clothes, bedding and other outfit and equipment as per rule 30 of these rules, a list of
which shall be kept in his case file. The provisions will be replenished from time to time as per rule 30 of
these rules;
(iii) the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall familiarise every newly admitted child with the Child
Care Institution and its functioning, particularly in the following areas:-
(a) personal health, hygiene and sanitation;
(b) discipline of the Child Care Institution and code of behaviour;
(c) daily routine activities and peer interaction; and
(d) rights, responsibilities and obligations within the Child Care Institution.
(iv) the child shall be examined by the medical officer, who shall record the state of health of the child,
and of any wound or mark on his person and any other observation which the medical officer thinks fit and
a copy of which shall be placed in the medical record of the child;
(v) a Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall be assigned to the child by the Person-in-charge.
H. Procedure to be adopted during the first fourteen days of receiving the child.-(1) The
assigned Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall interact with the child as often as possible.
(2) Within two days of the receipt of the child, if required, he may be examined by a panel of doctors to
understand his physical, medical, psychological state and his state of addiction, if any, for assessment of his
personality and requirements to assist in the rehabilitation plan to be prepared for him.
(3) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker assigned to the child shall also interact with the family
members of the child, where available. A case history in Form 43 shall be prepared and maintained in the
case file of the child. Information for the same may be collected through all possible and available sources
including the parents or guardians, home, school, friends, employer and community of the child.
(4) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall assess the educational level and vocational
aptitude of the child on the basis of tests and interviews, conducted with the assistance of other technical
staff. Necessary linkages, in this respect, shall be established with outside specialists and community based
welfare agencies, psychologist, psychiatrist, child guidance clinic, hospital and other Government and non-
governmental organisations.
I. Procedure to be adopted on the expiry of the first fourteen days.- (1)The child shall be shifted
to one of the regular dormitories and assigned a specific bed, cabinet and study table in that dormitory.
(2) Assignment of the dormitory shall be done on the basis of:
(i) age;
(ii) nature of offence committed by or against the child;
(iii) physical and mental status of the child;
(iv) children, requiring special care, shall be kept in a different dormitory.
(3) An individual care plan in Form 7 of the child shall be prepared by the Child Welfare Officer or Case
Worker on the basis of the child's case history, education and vocational aptitude. In case of rehabilitation
stay, the care plan shall be formulated for the complete period of the stay and shall necessarily include any
and all directions given by the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court towards the rehabilitation
including bridge courses, formal, informal or continuing education.
(4) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall review the individual care plan and note his opinion
in the rehabilitation card in Form 14 on the basis of his own observations, interaction with the child and his
teachers or instructors and the feedback received from the house father or house mother.
(5) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall also maintain a record of any difficulty faced by the
child during his stay at the Child Care Institution with a note of the steps taken to resolve the difficulty.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 231
(6) The Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker shall similarly keep a record of the complaints made by
the child with regard to the facilities in the Child Care Institution with a note of the steps taken thereon.
(7) The individual care plan shall be reviewed every fortnight during the initial three months and
thereafter, every month. A report of its effectiveness or inadequacy shall be prepared with reasons for such
opinion.
J. Procedure to be adopted after three months.- (1) The progress of the child shall be examined,
with specific reference to the aims and targets noted in the individual care plan for the child. The progress of
the child shall be reviewed and noted in the rehabilitation card in Form 14.
(2) The quarterly progress report shall be placed before the Management Committee for perusal and
consideration.
(3) After deliberation by the Management Committee, the individual care plan shall be appropriately
modified. The routine of the child and the approach towards rehabilitation of the child shall also be suitably
modified. Record of such modified care plan and daily routine shall be maintained in the case file of the
child. The progress shall be reviewed and recorded in the rehabilitation card in Form 14.
K. Pre-release planning.- (1) A well-conceived programme of pre-release planning and follow
up of cases discharged from Children’s Homes, special homes and places of safety shall be organised in all
institutions as per the directions of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court.
(2) In the event of a child leaving the Child Care Institution without permission or committing an offence
within the institution, the information shall be sent by the Person-in-charge to the police and the family, if
known; and the detailed report of circumstances along with the efforts to trace the child if the child is
missing, shall be sent to the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court, as the case may be.
L. Daily Routine in the Child Care Institution.- (1) Every child shall obey the order of an officer of
the Child Care Institution or house representative and shall remain under discipline.
(2) Every institution shall have a daily routine for the children in consultation with the Children’s
Committee, which shall be prominently displayed at various places within the institution.
(3) The daily routine shall include, inter alia, for a regulated and disciplined life, personal hygiene and
cleanliness, physical exercise, yoga, educational classes, vocational training, organised recreation and
games, moral education, group activities, prayer and community singing and special programmes for
Sundays and holidays.
M. Behaviour of the Child.- (1) The children in the Child Care Institution will be oriented and trained
to follow the rules and standards of good behaviour.
(2) Every unacceptable behaviour shall be taken note of by the Children’s Committee and the child
found in violation of rules may be made to give an explanation. The Children’s Committee may recommend
appropriate action to the Person-in-charge. A copy of the report containing the description of the incident
and the action taken thereupon shall be submitted to the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court by
the Person-in-charge within twenty-four hours. A copy of same shall also be placed before the Management
Committee for planning a long term strategy for prevention of such incidents.
(3) A copy of the report shall be kept in the case file of the child concerned.
(4) The Person-in-charge may deal with the violation appropriately giving due consideration to the
recommendation of the Children’s Committee and the safety and dignity of the child.
(5) The Person-in-charge may seek the assistance of the counsellor or the Child Welfare Officer or
Case Worker, any non-governmental organisation associated with the Child Care Institution in dealing with
the situation.
(6) A child showing exceptionally good behaviour shall be considered for appropriate reward or benefits
by the Person-in-charge and note of the same shall be placed in the case file of the child.
N. Manner of dealing with unacceptable behaviour.- (1) The action taken shall be commensurate
with the nature and degree of violation and the age of the child and may be any of the following:
(i) formal warning;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
232 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ii) assignment of house-keeping tasks;
(iii) imposition writing i.e. writing a number of times that he shall not repeat the behaviour; and
(iv) forfeiture of privileges viz. permission to watch television, permission to go for outdoor activity,
sports and recreation and other preferred activity;
(2) No child shall be subject to corporal punishment or any mental harassment including humiliating
behaviour affecting the dignity of the child.
O. Exceptional Good behaviour.- The following shall be considered good behaviour, namely:-
(i) following the rules of discipline and adhering to the routine, assessed over a period of a month;
(ii) preventing, any other child from indulging in any unacceptable behaviour or preventing violence;
(iii) preventing any mishap by raising an alarm, evacuating other children in case of disaster;
(iv) assisting any officer of the Child Care Institution in maintaining order. For the House representatives,
in situations that may develop into an emergency, the behaviour before the sounding of the alarm would
be considered;
(v) informing the Child Welfare Officer of any plan of creating unrest or of escape;
(vi) inform the Person-in-charge about any prohibited article or contraband;
(vii) helping another child to come out of his trauma;
(viii) performing exceptionally well in an examination in continuation of his studies, or vocational or
rehabilitation courses;
(ix) positive and adaptive behaviour;
(x) any other good behaviour as found exceptional by the Person-in-charge.
P. Reward or Benefits for maintaining exceptional behaviour.- The rewards to a child, at such
rates as may be fixed by the management of the institution from time to time, may be granted by the
Person-in-charge as an encouragement for good work and good behaviour and at the time of release, the
reward shall be handed over after obtaining a receipt from the parent or the guardian, who comes to take
charge of the child or child himself.
70. Prohibited Articles.- (1) No person shall bring into the Child Care Institution the following
prohibited articles, namely:-
(i) intoxicants of any description, psychotropic substances, liquor, ganja, bhang, opium, smack etc;
(ii) all explosives, poisonous substances, acid and chemicals, whether fluid or solid of whatever
description;
(iii) all arms, ammunition and weapons, knives and cutting implements of every kind and articles which
are capable of being used as a weapon of whatever description;
(iv) all obscene matter;
(v) string, rope, chains and all materials which are capable of being converted into string or rope or
chains, of whatever description;
(vi) wood, bamboo, club, stick, ladder, bricks, stones and earth of every description;
(vii) playing cards or other implements for gambling;
(viii) tobacco items, pan masala or similar item;
(ix) medicine that has not been specifically prescribed;
(x) any other article specified in this behalf by the State Government by a general or special order.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 233
(2) All bullion, metal, coin, jewellery, ornaments, currency notes, securities and articles of value of
every description including electronic items such as mobile phone, digital camera, i-pad, etc,. shall be
deposited in safe custody.
(3) The disposal of the prohibited articles shall be as per rule 72 of these rules.
71. Articles found on search and inspection.- (1) The Person-in-charge shall ensure that every child
received in the institution is searched, his personal belongings inspected and money or any valuables found
with the child is kept in the safe custody of the Person-in-charge. In case of search of a female child, the
search shall be carried out by female staff only. In every institution, a record of money, valuables and other
articles found with a child shall be maintained in the "Personal Belongings Register” which shall contain a
description of the articles.
(2) The entries made in the Personal Belongings Register, relating to each child, shall be read over to
the child in the presence of a witness, whose signature shall be obtained in token of the correctness of such
entries and it shall be countersigned by the Person-in-charge.
72. Disposal of articles.- (1) The money or valuables belonging to a child shall be disposed of in the
following manner, namely:
(i) on receipt of a child in an institution, the Person-in-charge shall deposit the money belonging to the
child in the bank account of the child;
(ii) the valuables, and other articles, if any, shall be kept in safe custody;
(iii) when such child is transferred from one institution to another, all his money, valuables and other
articles, shall be transferred along with the child to the Person-in-charge of the institution to which
he has been transferred together with a full and correct statement of the description thereof;
(iv) at the time of release of such child, all valuables and other articles kept in safe custody and the
money deposited in the name of the child shall be handed over to the parent or guardian, as the
case may be, with an entry made in this behalf in the register and signed by the parent or the
guardian;
(v) when a child in an institution dies, the valuables and other articles left by the deceased and the
money deposited in the name of the child shall be handed over by the Person-in-charge to the
parent or guardian of the child;
(vi) a receipt shall be obtained from such person for having received such money, valuables and other
articles; and
(vii) if no claimant appears within a period of six months from the date of death or escape of a child, the
valuables and other articles and money deposited in the name of the child shall be disposed of as
per the decision taken by Management Committee under rule 39 of these rules.
73. Maintenance of case file.- (1) The case file of each child maintained in the Child Care Institution in
safe custody shall be confidential.
(2) The case file shall be produced before the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court on every
date of production of the child for perusal of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court.
(3) The case file shall contain the following namely:
(i) report of the person or agency who produced the child before the Board or Committee including the
report of the police;
(ii) copy of FIR or DD entry in case of offence committed by or against the child;
(iii) photo ID, if available;
(iv) order of assignment of the Case Worker or Child Welfare Officer;
(v) case history form;
(vi) report of any urgent need of the child;
(vii) reports of the Person-in-charge, Probation Officer or Child Welfare Officer, counsellor and

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
234 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
caseworker;
(viii) the case file of the child maintained in any previous institution, if any;
(ix) report of the initial interaction with the child, information from family members, relatives, community,
friends and miscellaneous information;
(x) source of further information about the child, his family etc.;
(xi) observation reports from staff members;
(xii) regular health status reports from Medical Officer, drug de-addiction progress reports, as the case
may be;
(xiii) psycho-social profiling, regular counselling reports, any other mental health intervention report,
wherever applicable;
(xiv) report of Intelligence Quotient (I.Q) testing, aptitude testing, cognitive assessment, educational or
vocational tests, if conducted;
(xv) instructions regarding training and treatment programme and special precautions to be taken;
(xvi) copy of the personal belongings register;
(xvii) copy of order declaring the age of the child;
(xviii) leave and other privileges granted;
(xix) Rehabilitation Card;
(xx) quarterly progress report;
(xxi) individual care plan, including pre-release programme, post release plan and follow-up plan as
prescribed and modifications therein;
(xxii) fortnightly and monthly report of the effectiveness of the care plan;
(xxiii) record of difficulties faced by the child and their resolution;
(xxiv) record of the complaints of the child and action taken on them;
(xxv) feedback given by the child;
(xxvi) leave of absence or release under supervision;
(xxvii) report about a visitor visiting the child being found to have objectionable or prohibited articles;
(xxviii) report of the child having such articles and action taken on the same;
(xxix) report of any unacceptable behaviour and outcome;
(xxx) report of any exceptional behaviour and outcome;
(xxxi) special achievements and violation of rules, if any;
(xxxii) note of the rewards or earnings of the child and receipt by the child or his parent or guardian;
(xxxiii) release or restoration order;
(xxxiv) escort order, if any;
(xxxv) compliance report of release in case of children under rehabilitation intervention stay;
(xxxvi) report of the child not being released and compliance report of the directions issued on non-release
of a child;
(xxxvii) follow-up reports;
(xxxviii) annual photograph;
(xxxix) follow-up report of post release cases as per the direction of the Board or the Committee or the

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 235
Children’s Court;
(xl) copy of any other report called by the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court in respect of
the child; and
(xli) remarks, if any.
(4) The medical record of a child shall contain all reports and records of the child regarding the status
of his physical and mental health, addiction status and treatment, etc.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker concerned to maintain the
case file.
(6) All the case files maintained by the institutions may be computerised and the State Government
may develop appropriate processes for the same.
74. Visits to and communication with children.- (1) Every child in the Child Care Institution may be
permitted to have one meeting in a week with his relatives:
Provided that in special cases, where parents or guardians have travelled a long distance from
another State or District, the Person-in-charge may allow the parents or guardians entry into the premises
and a meeting with their children on other days on confirmation of their identity and they being reported not
to have been involved in subjecting the child to abuse and exploitation.
(2) A newly received child shall be permitted to meet his parent or guardian or family member on their
first visit on any day.
(3) No meeting shall be permitted with the parent or guardian or relatives where such visitors have been
found to be involved in subjecting the child to violence, abuse and exploitation or carrying any prohibited
articles, except with the express permission granted by the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court
or when such meeting has been specifically directed by the counsellor of the child.
(4) Every child shall be allowed to write two letters in a week to his parent or guardian or to his relatives.
Necessary stationary and postage for the letters shall be provided by the Person-in-charge.
(5) The Person-in-charge may peruse any letter written by or to the child and may for reasons to be
noted in the case file of the child, refuse to deliver or issue the letter. A report of the same shall be prepared
and placed before the Management Committee. A copy of the report shall be retained on the case file and
another copy shall be sent to the Board or the Children’s Court or the Committee.
(6) Every child shall be allowed to bring any written communication for the purpose of handing over to
the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court, as the case may be, and be provided stationary, etc. for
the same.
(7) The Person-in-charge may allow a child to speak with his parents or guardians on telephone once a
week under supervision of the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker or Probation Officer and record shall
be duly maintained of such calls.
(8) Every person desiring to meet the child shall, before the meeting, disclose his name and address
with proof, which shall be noted in the visitors register and signed by the visitor. Copy of the photo identity
card containing the address and a photograph of the visitor to be taken before the meeting, shall be
retained by the institution. If the visitor refuses to disclose his particulars, he shall be denied the meeting.
(9) The visitor shall, submit himself for a search at the main gate, female visitors shall be searched by
female staff only.
(10) Every meeting shall take place in the presence of the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker or
Probation Officer of the Child Care Institution, who shall be responsible for any irregularity that occurs and
who shall be so placed that he is able to see and to prevent any objectionable or prohibited article being
passed between the parties.
(11) Every child shall be carefully searched before and after the meeting in the presence of visitor. The
child should not be having anything with him before he goes for the meeting.
(12) If any objectionable or prohibited article is found in the search conducted before the meeting:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
236 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(i) the said article shall be seized;
(ii) the Person-in-charge shall conduct an inquiry to know the identity of the person(s) responsible for
the article reaching the child;
(iii) if the person(s) responsible are from the staff of the Child Care Institution, appropriate action will be
initiated against them; and
(iv) a detailed report of the inquiry and its result shall be forwarded to the Department and the Board or
court of competent criminal jurisdiction.
(13) If any objectionable or prohibited article is found in the search conducted after the meeting:
(i) the article shall be seized;
(ii) in case of any illegal article being found warranting legal action, the article and the visitor shall be
detained and the police informed. The visitor and such article shall be handed over to the police;
(iii) a report of such visitor shall be prepared and placed in the case file of the child;
(iv) a report of the incident shall be forwarded to the Board or court of competent criminal jurisdiction; and
(v) copy of the report shall be placed in the case file of the child.
(14) Any child who abuses the privilege of meeting shall be denied the same for such period as the
Person-in-charge may direct. A report of the same shall be sent to the Board or the Committee or the
Children’s Court and a copy shall be retained in the case file of the child.
(15) Every child shall be entitled to communicate with his legal counsel provided that:
(i) the rules of search and seizure shall apply to all legal counsels also;
(ii) every such interview shall take place within the sight of a home official, though at a safe distance so
as to be out of hearing;
(iii) the person wishing to have an interview with the child in the capacity of his advocate shall apply in
writing, giving his name, address and enrolment number with a copy of a vakalatnama, duly
attested by the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court;
(iv) any child who claims to have no counsel shall be permitted to meet the legal aid counsels who visit
the Child Care Institution in the normal course.
75. Death of a Child.- (1) On the occurrence of any case of death or suicide of a child in a Child Care
Institution, the procedure to be adopted shall be as under:
(i) The institution must ensure that an inquest and post-mortem examination is held at the earliest.
(ii) In case of natural death or death due to illness of a child, the Person-in-charge shall obtain a report
of the Medical Officer stating the cause of death and a written intimation about the death shall be
given immediately to the nearest Police Station, Board or Committee and the parents or guardians
or relatives of the child.
(iii) Immediate information shall be given by the case-worker or Probation Officer or Child Welfare
Officer to the Person-in-charge and the Medical Officer and the Person-in-charge shall immediately
inform the nearest police station, Board or Committee and parents or guardians or relatives of the
deceased child.
(iv) If a child dies within twenty-four hours of his admission to the Child Care Institution, the Person-in-
charge of the Child Care Institution shall report the matter to the police and the District Medical
Officer or the nearest Government hospital and the parents or guardians or relatives of such child
without delay.
(v) The Person-in-charge and the Medical Officer of the Child Care Institution shall record the
circumstances of the death of the child and send a report to the concerned Magistrate, the police,
the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court and the District Medical Officer or the nearest
Government hospital where the dead body of the child is sent for examination and determination of
the cause of death and the person-in charge and the Medical Officer shall also record in writing

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 237
their views on the cause of death, if any, and submit it to the concerned Magistrate and to the
police.
(vi) The Person-in-charge and the Medical Officer at the Child Care Institution shall make themselves
available for any inquiry initiated by the police or the Magistrate regarding the cause of death and
other details regarding such child.
(vii) As soon as the inquest is over, the body of the child shall be handed over to the parent or guardian
or relatives or, in the absence of any claimant, the last rites shall be performed under the
supervision of the Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution in accordance with the known
religion of the child after retaining a photograph of the child for future reference.
76. Abuse and Exploitation of the Child.- (1) Every institution shall evolve a system of ensuring that
there is no abuse, neglect and maltreatment and shall include the staff who is aware of what constitutes
abuse, neglect and maltreatment, and their early indication and how to respond to these abuses.
(2) In the event of any physical, sexual or emotional abuse, including neglect of children in an
institution by those responsible for care and protection, the following action shall be taken namely:
(i) the incidents of abuse and exploitation shall be reported by any staff member of the institution
immediately to the Person-in-charge on receiving such information;
(ii) when an allegation of physical, sexual or emotional abuse comes to the knowledge of the Person-in-
charge, a report shall be placed before the Board or Committee, who in turn shall, order for special
investigation;
(iii) the Board or Committee shall direct the local police station or Special Juvenile Police Unit to register
a case, take due cognizance of such incidents and conduct necessary investigation;
(iv) the Board or Committee shall take necessary steps to ensure completion of inquiry and provide legal
aid as well as counselling to the child victim;
(v) the Board or Committee shall transfer such a child to another institution or place of safety or fit
person, as the case may be;
(vi) the Person-in-charge of the institution shall also inform the Chairperson of the Management
Committee and place a copy of the report of the incident and subsequent action taken in its next meeting;
(vii) in the event of any other crime committed in respect of children in institutions, the Board or
Committee shall take cognizance and arrange for necessary investigation to be carried out by the local
police or Special Juvenile Police Unit;
(viii) the Board or Committee may consult Children’s Committee setup in each institution to enquire into
the fact of abuse and exploitation as well as seek assistance from voluntary organisations, child rights
experts, mental health experts or crisis intervention centres in dealing with matters of abuse and
exploitation of children in an institution.
77. Maintenance of Registers.- (1) The persons mentioned in column (3) shall maintain registers and
forms under the Act and the rules made thereunder in column (2) whose custodian shall be the persons
mentioned in column (4) thereof as under:
Table
S.No. Register and forms To be maintained by Custodian
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Admission and Discharge Register Child Welfare Officer/Case Person-in-
which will indicate change of nature Worker/Receiving Officer charge
of custody.
2. Attendance Registers for staff and Shift Incharge Person-in-
children. charge
3. Budget Statement file. Person-in-charge Person-in-
charge

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
238 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
4. Case file of each child. Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker Person-in-
charge
5. Cash Book. Accounts Officer/Cashier Person-in-
charge
6. Children’s Suggestion Book. Children's Committee Person-in-
charge
7. Counselling Register. Counsellor Person-in-
charge
8. Drug de-addiction programme Child Welfare Officer/ Case Worker Person-in-
enrolment and progress register. charge
9. Handing over Charge Register. Shift Incharge Person-in-
charge
10. House-keeping and Sanitation House Parent Person-in-
Register. charge
11. Inspection Book. Person-in-charge Person-in-
charge
12. Legal Services Register. Child Welfare Officer/ Case Worker Person-in-
charge
13. Library Register. Teacher Person-in-
charge
14. Log Book. Driver Person-in-
charge
15. Meals Register/Nutrition Diet File. House Parent Shift Incharge
16. Medical File of each child. Staff Nurse Person-in-
charge
17. Meeting Book. Child Welfare Officer/ Case Worker Person-in-
charge
18. Minutes Register of Children’s Child Welfare Officer/ Case Worker Person-in-
Committees. charge
19. Minutes Register of Management Person-in-charge Person-in-
Committee. charge
20. Order Book. Person-in-charge Person-in-
charge
21. Personal Belongings Register. Child Welfare Officer/Case Worker Person-in-
charge
22. Production Register Probation Officer/ Child Welfare Person-in-
Officer/ Case Worker charge
23. Staff Movement Register. Incharge of Security Person-in-
charge
24. Stock Register. Store keeper cum accountant Person-in-
charge
25. Visitor’s Book Security Guards Main Gate's
Keeper

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 239
78. Openness and Transparency.- (1) All Child Care Institutions shall be open to visitors with the
permission of the Board or the Committee or the Person-in-charge, who may allow voluntary organisations,
social workers, researchers, doctors, academicians, and such other persons as the Management
Committee may permit or consider appropriate keeping in view the security, welfare and the interest of the
children.
(2) Where permission referred to in sub-rule(1) is given by the Person-in-charge, he shall make a
monthly report of such permission including the orders received from the Board or the Committee to the
State Child Protection Society and also to the Board or the Committee, as the case may be.
(3) The Person-in-charge of the Child Care institution shall encourage active involvement of the local
community and corporates in improving the condition in the institution or support the child.
(4) The Person-in-charge shall maintain a visitors’ book to record the remarks of the visitors.
(5) The Person-in-charge shall take all steps to inform the visitors to maintain the dignity of children.
79. Release of a child from a Child Care Institution.- (1) The Person-in-charge of the Child Care
Institution shall maintain a roster of the cases of children to be released on the expiry of the period of stay
as ordered by the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court.
(2) The timely information of the release of a child and of the exact date of release shall be given to the
parent or guardian and the parent or guardian shall be called to the Child Care Institution to take charge of
the child on that date and if necessary, the actual expenses of the parent’s or guardian’s journey both ways
and of the child’s journey from the Child Care Institution shall be paid to the parent or guardian by the
Person-in-charge at the time of the release of the child.
(3) If the parent or guardian, as the case may be, fails to come and take charge of the child on the
appointed date, the child shall be taken by the escort of the Child Care Institution; and in case of a girl, she
shall be escorted by a female escort who shall hand over the custody to her parent/guardian.
(4) At the time of release or discharge, a child may be provided with a set of suitable clothing and
essential toiletries.
(5) When the child attains the age of eighteen years, he may be placed, if eligible, in an aftercare
programme, subject to the consent of the child and the approval of the Board or the Committee or the
Children’s Court.
(6) In case the date of release falls on a Sunday or a public holiday, the child may be discharged on the
preceding day with an entry to that effect being made in the register of discharge.
(7) The Person-in-charge of the Child Care Institution may in appropriate cases, order the payment of
subsistence money, at such rates as may be fixed from time to time, by the State Government, and the
railway and/or road fares, as the case may be.
(8) Where a girl child has no place to go after release and requests for stay in the Child Care Institution
after the period of stay is over, the Person-in-charge may, subject to the approval of the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court, allow her stay only for a limited period till the time, some other suitable
arrangement is made by her.
80. Child suffering from disease requiring prolonged medical treatment in an approved place
and transfer of a child who is mentally ill or addicted to alcohol or other drugs.- (1) The Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court may send the child to a fit facility for such period as may be certified by a
medical officer or mental health expert or on the recommendation of the Person-in-charge or Probation
Officer or Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker, as necessary for proper treatment of the child who is
mentally ill or addicted to alcohol or drugs or any other substance which lead to behavioural changes in a
person for the remainder of the term for which he has to stay.
(2) When the child is cured of the disease or physical or mental health problems, the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court may, order the child to be placed back in the care from where the child
was removed for treatment and if the child no longer requires to be kept under further care, the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court may order him to be discharged.
(3) The State Government may set up separate Integrated Rehabilitation Centres for child addicts on
the basis of appropriate age groups.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
240 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
81. Transfer of Child.- (1) During the inquiry, if it is found that the child hails from a place outside the
jurisdiction of the Board or the Committee, the Board or the Committee shall order the transfer of the child
and send a copy of the order stating the reasons for and circumstances of such transfer to the State
Government and District Child Protection Unit.
(2) The District Child Protection Unit shall accordingly:
(i) send the information of transfer to the appropriate Board or the Committee having jurisdiction over
the area where the child is ordered to be transferred by the Board or Committee; and
(ii) send a copy of the information to the Person-in-charge of the institution where the child is to be
placed for care and protection at the time of the transfer order.
(3) The child shall be escorted at Government expenses to the place or person as specified in the
order and a travelling allowance on a per day basis shall be determined by the Board or the Committee
which shall be paid by the District Child Protection Unit of the State which has transferred the child.
(4) On such transfer, case file and records of the child shall be sent along with the child.
(5) Where the child is a national of another country, the Board or the Committee shall inform the State
Government immediately on the production of the child before the Board or the Committee which may
initiate the process for repatriation of the child immediately in consultation with Ministry of Home Affairs and
Ministry of External Affairs, as the case may be.
(6) During the period pending the finalisation of the repatriation, the child shall be kept in a Child Care
Institution.
(7) The expenses for the repatriation of the child to another country shall be borne by the State
Government concerned.
82. Restoration and Follow-up.- (1) The Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court may make
an order in Form 44 for the release of the child placed in a Child Care Institution after hearing the child and
his parents or guardian, and after satisfying itself as to the identity of the persons claiming to be the parents
or the guardian.
(2) While passing an order for restoration of the child, the Board or the Committee or the Children’s
Court shall take into account the reports of the Probation Officer, social worker or Child Welfare Officer or
Case Worker or non-governmental organisation, including report of a home study prepared on the direction
of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court in appropriate cases, and any other relevant
document or report brought before the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court.
(3) The order of restoration shall include an individual care plan prepared by the Probation Officer or
the social worker or the Child Welfare Officer or Case Worker or non-governmental organisation.
(4) The Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court, while directing restoration of the child, may
pass order for an escort in Form 45, where necessary.
(5) Besides police, the Board or the Committee may seek collaboration with non-governmental
organisations to accompany the child back to the family for restoration.
(6) In case of girls, the child shall necessarily be accompanied by female escorts.
(7) The copy of the restoration order along with a copy of the order for escort shall be forwarded by the
Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court to the District Child Protection Unit which shall provide
funds for the restoration of the child, including travel and other incidental expenses.
(8) When a child expresses his unwillingness to be restored back to the family, the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court shall interact with the child to find out the reasons for the same and
record the same and the child shall not be coerced or persuaded to go back to the family. The child may
also not be restored back to the family where the social investigation report prepared by the Child Welfare
Officer or the social worker or the Case Worker or the non-governmental organisation establishes that
restoration to family may not be in the interest of the child. The child would also not be restored back to the
family where the parents or guardians refuse to accept the child back. In all such cases, the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court may provide alternative means for rehabilitation.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 241
(9) A follow-up plan shall be prepared as part of the individual care plan by the Probation Officer or the
Child Welfare Officer or the Case Worker or the social worker or the non-governmental organisation.
(10) The follow-up report shall state the situation of the child post restoration and the measures
necessary in order to reduce further vulnerability of the child.
83. Juvenile Justice Fund.- (1) The State Government shall create a fund called the Juvenile Justice
Fund for the welfare and rehabilitation of the children dealt with under the Act and the rules.
(2) The State Government shall make adequate budgetary allocations towards the Juvenile Justice
Fund.
(3) The Juvenile Justice Fund may receive donations, voluntary contributions, subscriptions or funds
under Corporate Social Responsibility, whether or not for any specific purpose, and shall be directly credited
to the Juvenile Justice Fund.
(4) The Juvenile Justice Fund may be utilised by the State Government for the following purposes,
namely:-
(i) establishment and administration of Child Care Institutions;
(ii) supporting innovative programmes for the welfare of the children in the Child Care Institutions;
(iii) strengthening of legal assistance and support;
(iv) providing entrepreneurial support, skill development training or vocational training;
(v) providing lump-sum subsistence support to children leaving Child Care Institution on attaining the
age of eighteen years;
(vi) providing after care facilities and entrepreneurship fund for providing capital and infrastructure to
persons who have crossed the age of eighteen within institutionalized care, for starting up small
businesses to support reintegration into mainstream life;
(vii) providing support for foster care, sponsorship and after care;
(viii) rehabilitation of children in special circumstances including children released from militant groups
and adult groups;
(ix) meeting the expenses of travel for trial and restoration of children, including the expenses of the
escorts including police;
(x) creating child friendly police stations, Boards, courts and Committees;
(xi) Capacity building for parents and caregivers to understand needs of children;
(xii) awareness generation programmes on child rights and offences against children;
(xiii) creating community-based child protection programmes to identify and report offences against
children;
(xiv) providing specialised professional services, counselors, translators, interpreters, special educators,
social workers, mental health workers, vocational trainers etc. for the children covered under the
Act;
(xv) providing recreational facilities and extra-curricular activities for the children covered under the Act
including those in Child Care Institutions;
(xvi) palliative care for cancer affected children and stay facilities for their parents; and
(xvii) any other programme or activity to support the holistic growth, development and well-being of a
child covered under the Act and the rules.
(5) The Juvenile Justice Fund shall be maintained and administered by Department of the State
Government dealing with the implementation of this Act through the State Child Protection Society.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
242 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(6) The State Child Protection Society, with the approval of the State Government shall adopt financial
rules to govern the utilisation of the Juvenile Justice Fund.
84. State Child Protection Society.- (1) The State Child Protection Society shall perform the following
functions namely:
(i) overseeing the implementation of the Act and the rules framed thereunder in the State and
supervision and monitoring of agencies and institutions under the Act;
(ii) addressing road-blocks, issues, complaints received regarding care and protection of children;
(iii) ensure that all institutions set up under the Act and the rules are in place and performing their
assigned duties;
(iv) reviewing reports received from various District Child Protection Units on the functioning of
institutions in various districts and take action to facilitate the protection of children wherever
necessary and monitoring the functioning of the District Child Protection Units;
(v) develop programmes for foster care, sponsorship and after-care;
(vi) inquire into, seek reports and make recommendations in cases of death or suicide in Child Care
Institutions and under other institutional care;
(vii) ensure inter-department coordination and liaising with the relevant departments of the State and
Central Governments and State Child Protection Societies of other States or Union Territories;
(viii) networking and coordinating with civil society organisations working for the effective
implementation of the Act and the rules;
(ix) maintaining a state level database of all children in institutional care and family based non-
institutional care and updating it on a quarterly basis;
(x) maintaining a database of Child Care Institutions, Specialised Adoption Agencies, open shelters, fit
persons and fit facilities, registered foster parents, sponsors, after care organisations and other
institutions at the State level;
(xi) maintaining a database of medical and counselling centres, de-addiction centres, hospitals, open
schools, education facilities, apprenticeship and vocational training programmes and centres,
recreational facilities such as performing arts, fine arts and facilities for children with special needs
and other such facilities at the State level;
(xii) monitoring and administering the Juvenile Justice Fund set up by the State Government including
disbursal of funds to the District Child Protection Units, Special Juvenile Police Units and police
stations, as the case may be;
(xiii) maintaining separate accounts for all funds received by the State Child Protection Society such as
the Juvenile Justice Fund, funds under Schemes of Central and State Government and getting the
same audited;
(xiv) generate awareness among public on various aspects of the Act and the rules made thereunder
specifically the existing institutional framework, rehabilitation measures, penalties, procedures for
better protection of children;
(xv) organise and conduct programmes for the implementation of the Act including training and capacity
building of stakeholders;
(xvi) commission research programmes on child protection;
(xvii) co-ordinate with State Legal Services Authority and law schools; and
(xviii) any other function for the effective implementation of the Act and the rules made thereunder.
(3) The Member- Secretary of the State Child Protection Society shall be the Nodal Officer in the State
for the implementation of the Act and the rules.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 243
85. District Child Protection Unit.- (1) The District Child Protection Unit shall perform following
functions, namely:
(i) maintain report of quarterly information sent by the Board about children in conflict with law
produced before the Board and the quarterly report sent by the Committee;
(ii) arrange for individual or group counselling and community service for children;
(iii) conduct follow up of the individual care plan prepared on the direction of the Children’s Court for
children in the age group of sixteen to eighteen years found to be in conflict with law for committing
heinous offence;
(iv) conduct review of the child placed in the place of safety every year and forward the report to the
Children’s Court;
(v) maintain a list of persons who can be engaged as monitoring authorities and send the list of such
persons to the Children’s Court along with bi-annual updates;
(vi) maintain record of run- away children from Child Care Institutions;
(vii) identify families at risk and children in need of care and protection;
(viii) assess the number of children in difficult circumstances and create district-specific databases to
monitor trends and patterns of children in difficult circumstances;
(ix) periodic and regular mapping of all child related services at district for creating a resource directory
and making the information available to the Committees and Boards from time to time;
(x) facilitate the implementation of non-institutional programmes including sponsorship, foster care and
after care as per the orders of the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court;
(xi) facilitate transfer of children at all levels for their restoration to their families;
(xii) ensure inter-departmental coordination and liaise with the relevant departments of the State
Government and State Child Protection Society of the State and other District Child Protection Units
in the State;
(xiii) network and coordinate with civil society organisations working under the Act;
(xiv) inquire into, seek reports and take action in cases of death or suicide in child care institutions and
under other institutional care and submit the reports to the State Child Protection Society;
(xv) look into the complaints and suggestions of the children as contained in the children’s suggestion
box and take appropriate action;
(xvi) be represented on the Management Committees within the Child Care Institutions;
(xvii) maintain a district level database of missing children in institutional care and uploading the same on
designated portal and of children availing the facility of Open Shelter and of children placed in foster
care;
(xviii) maintain a database of child care institutions, specialised adoption agencies, open shelter, fit
persons and fit facilities, registered foster parents, after care organisations and institutions etc. at
the district level and forward the same to the Boards, the Committees, the Children’s Courts and the
State Child Protection Society, as the case may be;
(xix) maintain a database of medical and counselling centres, de-addiction centres, hospitals, open
schools, education facilities, apprenticeship and vocational training programmes and centres,
recreational facilities such as performing arts, fine arts and facilities for children with special needs
and other such facilities at the district level and forward the same to the Boards, the Committees,
the Children’s Courts and the State Child Protection Society;
(xx) maintain a database of special educators, mental health experts, translators, interpreters,
counsellors, psychologists or psycho-social workers or other experts who have experience of
working with children in difficult circumstances at the district level and forward the same to the
Boards and the Committees and the Children’s Court and the State Child Protection Society;

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(xxi) generate awareness and organise and conduct programmes for the implementation of the Act
including training and capacity building of stakeholders under the Act;
(xxii) organise quarterly meeting with all stakeholders at district level to review the progress and
implementation of the Act;
(xxiii) submit a monthly report to the State Child Protection Society;
(xxiv) notify the State Government about a vacancy in the Board or the Committee six months before such
vacancy arises;
(xxv) review reports submitted by Inspection Committees and resolve the issues raised through
coordination among the stakeholders;
(xxvi) provide secretarial staff to the Committees and the Boards;
(xxvii) all other functions necessary for effective implementation of the Act including liaising with
community and corporates for improving the functioning of Child Care Institutions.
(2) The District Child Protection Officer shall be the Nodal Officer in the district for the implementation
of the Act and the rules.
86. Special Juvenile Police Unit.- (1) The State Government shall constitute a Special Juvenile Police
Unit in each district and city to co-ordinate all functions of police related to children.
(2) The Central Government shall constitute a Special Juvenile Police Unit for the Railway Protection
Force or Government Railway Police at every railway station as per requirement and where a Special
Juvenile Police Unit cannot be set up, at least one Railway Protection Force or Government Railway Police
Officer shall be designated as the Child Welfare Police Officer.
(3) The Child Welfare Police Officers and other police officers of the Special Juvenile Police Unit shall
be given, appropriate training and orientation to deal with matters concerning children.
(4) The transfer and posting of the designated Child Welfare Police Officers may be within the Special
Juvenile Police Units of other police stations or the district unit.
(5) The police officer interacting with children shall be as far as possible in plain clothes and not in
uniform and for dealing with girl child, woman police personnel shall be engaged.
(6) The Child Welfare Police Officer or any other police officer shall speak in polite and soft manner
and shall maintain dignity and self-esteem of the child.
(7) Where questions that may lead to discomfort of the child are to be asked, such questions shall be
asked in tactful manner.
(8) When an FIR is registered for offence against a child, a copy of the FIR shall be handed over to the
complainant or child victim and subsequent to the completion of investigation, copy of report of investigation
and other relevant documents shall be handed over to the complainant or any person authorised to act on
his behalf.
(9) No accused or suspected accused shall be brought in contact with the child and where the victim
and the person in conflict with law are both children, they shall not be brought in contact with each other.
(10) The Special Juvenile Police Unit shall have a list of:
(i) the Board and Child Welfare Committee in its due jurisdiction, their place of sitting, hours of
sitting, names and contact details of Principal Magistrate and members of the Board, names and
contact details of Chairperson and members of the Committee and the procedures to be followed
before the Board and the Committee; and
(ii) contact details of the Child Care Institutions and fit facilities in its due jurisdiction.
(11) The names and contact details of the Special Juvenile Police Unit or Child Welfare Police Officer
shall be placed at a conspicuous part at the police stations, Child Care Institutions, Committees, Boards and
the Children’s Courts.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 245
(12) The Special Juvenile Police Unit shall work in close co-ordination with the District Child Protection
Unit, the Board and the Committee in the matters concerning the welfare of children within its jurisdiction.
(13) The Special Juvenile Police Unit may coordinate with the District Legal Services Authority to
provide legal aid to children.
87. Selection Committee and its composition.- (1) The State Government shall constitute a
Selection Committee for a period of three years by notification in the Official Gazette consisting of the
following members, namely:
(i) a retired judge of High Court as the Chairperson to be appointed in consultation with the Chief
Justice of the High Court concerned;
(ii) one representative from the Department implementing the Act not below the rank of Director as the
ex-officio Member Secretary;
(iii) two representatives from two different reputed non-governmental organisations respectively working
in the area of child development or child protection for a minimum period of seven years but not
running or managing any children’s institution;
(iv) two representatives from academic bodies or Universities preferably from the faculty of social work,
psychology, sociology, child development, health, education, law, and with special knowledge or
experience of working on children’s issues for a minimum period of seven years; and
(v) a representative of the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights.
(2) The Committee shall continue for a maximum period of three months after the completion of its
tenure by which time new Committee shall be constituted.
(3) If a vacancy arises in the Selection Committee, the Member Secretary shall intimate the Secretary
of the Department implementing the Act who shall take steps to fill the vacancy for the remaining period at
the earliest.
(4) The quorum for the meeting of the Selection Committee shall be not less than four Members,
including the Chairperson and the Member Secretary.
(5) The Member Secretary of the Selection Committee shall convene the meetings of the Selection
Committee at such times as may be necessary for facilitating and carrying out the functions of the Selection
Committee.
(6) The Member Secretary shall maintain the minutes of the selection process and all other meetings of
the Selection Committee.
(7) The Chairperson and non-official members of the Selection Committee shall be paid such sitting
fees and travel allowances as may be fixed by the State Government from time to time.
(8) All communications relating to the working and discharge of the functions of the Selection
Committee shall be addressed to the Office of the Member Secretary, who shall place the same before the
Selection Committee.
(9) All records relating to selection shall be placed on the website of the State Government Department
concerned.
88. Selection of Chairperson and Members of the Committee or Board.- (1) The Member Secretary
of the Selection Committee shall initiate the process of filling up a vacancy six months prior to the
incumbent demitting office:
Provided that if a vacancy arises on account of resignation or death of the Chairperson of the
Committee or a Member of the Board or Committee the Member Secretary of the Selection Committee shall
immediately initiate the process for filling up such vacancy.
(2) For selection of members of the Board or Chairperson and members of the Committee, the State
Government through the Member Secretary of the Selection Committee shall call for applications through
public advertisement in the local and national newspapers and official website of the Department
implementing the Act.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
246 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(3) The Member Secretary shall screen all the applications received and place the applications which
fulfil the basic eligibility requirements before the Selection Committee.
(4) The Selection Committee shall evaluate the candidates on the basis of qualifications, experience of
working with children and personal interaction with the candidate.
(5) A member selected by the Selection Committee should not:
(i) be holding such full-time occupation that may not allow the person to give necessary time and
attention to the work of the Board or the Committee as per the Act and rules;
(ii) be associated with any Child Care Institution, directly or indirectly, during his tenure as a member of
the Board or Committee or have any other conflict of interest.
(iii) hold any office in any political party during his tenure, or
(iv) be insolvent.
(6) Where the Selection Committee is required to consider an application for renewal of tenure of
Members of the Board or Committee as the case may be, it shall evaluate the application on the basis of the
following criteria, namely:
(i) regular performance appraisals of the Member carried out by the District Judge or District Magistrate
quarterly as per a specified format, a copy of which shall be made available to the Chairperson and
Members of the Selection Committee by the Member Secretary;
(ii) complaints if any, received and addressed by the Selection Committee against the person seeking
an extension of tenure; and
(iii) interaction with such applicant.
(7) The Selection Committee shall, on the basis of the evaluation procedure and criteria, select and
recommend a panel of names in order of merit to the State Government for appointment as Members of the
Board or Chairperson or Members of the Committee as the case may be.
(8) In recommending a panel of names, the Selection Committee shall prepare separate panels for the
position of Chairperson of the Committee, Members of the Committee and Members of the Board
respectively.
(9) The Selection Committee shall prepare a three member panel for each position, which shall be vaild
for a period of one year.
(10) The list of finalised names shall be duly signed by all members of the Selection Committee present
at the time of selection and the Member Secretary of the Selection Committee shall forward the finalised list
to the State Government for appointment. The State Government shall constitute one or more Boards or
Committees, as the case may be, in each district through notification in Official Gazette within a period of
two months of receipt of recommendations of Selection Committee.
(11) Names on the panel shall be valid for consideration for a period of one year which may be extended
by six months where a new panel has not yet been constituted, in order to fill in vacancies which may arise
during such period either due to non-reporting of the selected persons within a stipulated time from the date
of appointment, or otherwise during the tenure of the Board or Committee.
(12) If a vacancy in the Board or Committee arises, the District Child Protection Unit shall inform the
State Government for filling up such vacancy.
(13) The State Government shall fill the vacancies on the basis of the panel of names recommended by
the Selection Committee within a period of three months from receiving such information from the District
Child Protection Unit.
(14) If any complaint is made against a member of the Board or Committee, the State Government shall
hold necessary inquiry except in respect of judicial officers; complaints against judicial officers shall be
forwarded to the Registrar of the High Court for action.
(15) The State Government shall complete the inquiry within a period of one month and take appropriate
action within two months.
(16) If a criminal case is registered against the person concerned, Government may suspend the
appointment for such term as appropriate after due inquiry.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 247
89. Training of Personnel Dealing with Children.- (1) The State Government shall provide for
training of personnel appointed under the Act and the rules and each category of staff, keeping in view with
their statutory responsibilities and specific jobs requirements.
(2) The training programme shall include:
(i) introduction of the Act and the rules made thereunder;
(ii) orientation on child welfare, care, protection and child rights;
(iii) induction training of the newly recruited personnel;
(iv) refresher training courses and skill enhancement programmes, documentation and sharing of
good practices; and
(v) conferences, seminars and workshops.
(3) The following categories of personnel shall have to undergo training for minimum period of fifteen
days, namely:-
S. No. Personnel
1. Staff of Children’s Court and Principal Magistrates of Juvenile Justice Boards
2. Members of Juvenile Justice Boards
3. Chairpersons and Members of Child Welfare Committees
4. Child Welfare Police Officers and other police officers of Special Juvenile Police Units
5. Programme Managers and Programme Officers of State Child Protection Societies and State
Adoption Resource Agency
6. Staff of State Adoption Resource Agency
7. Legal-cum-Probation Officers under District Child Protection Units and Probation Officers in
Child Care Institutions
8. Staff of District Child Protection Units and State Child Protection Society
9. Persons-in-charge of Child Care Institutions (including Open Shelters)
(4) The State Government shall also provide training to other personnel such as social workers, Child
Welfare Officers, Case Workers, rehabilitation cum placement Officers, care givers, house fathers and
house mothers of Child Care Institutions, security personnel and other staff of Child Care Institutions,
Frontline Workers, bridge course educators, outreach workers and community volunteers, Social Workers of
Specialised Adoption Agencies, Directors or Incharge of Specialised Adoption Agencies, chief functionaries
of organisations granted registration for running Child Care Institutions under the Act, mental health
practitioners, psychologists, psychiatrists, psychiatric social workers, legal services lawyers, members of
Committees or societies constituted under the Act and the rules thereunder.
(5) The State Governments, while organising training programmes for the stakeholders at State or
District level, shall ensure that training modules and training manuals to be developed by State Child
Protection Society are in consultation with National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development
or Institutions having requisite expertise in order to maintain uniformity in the training process throughout
the country.
(6) The Judicial Academy in States may develop training module and training manual for the training of
Principal Magistrates including on child psychology, use of child friendly procedures and ensuring child
friendly environment, care, protection and rehabilitation of children and organise such training programmes
at the State level.
(7) The Police Academy in States may develop training module and training manual in consultation
with National Police Academy for the training of police and Child Welfare Police Officers including on child
psychology, use of child friendly procedures and ensuring child friendly environment, care, protection and
rehabilitation of children and organise such training programmes at the State level.
(8) The State Legal Services Authority shall organise training programme for legal service lawyers and
para legal volunteers.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
248 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(9) The State Child Protection Society in consultation with institutions with requisite expertise shall
organise training programme for Probation Officers.
(10) The Central Adoption Resource Authority, may develop appropriate training modules and manuals
for Specialised Adoption Agencies and staff of State Adoption Resource Agency and organise training
programmes.
90. Pending Cases.- (1) No child shall be denied the benefits of the Act and the rules made
thereunder.
(2) The benefits referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be made available to all persons who were children at
the time of the commission of the offence, even if they ceased to be children during the pendency of the
inquiry or trial.
(3) While computing the period of detention or stay or sentence of a child in conflict with law, all such
period which the child had already spent in custody, detention, stay or sentence of imprisonment shall be
counted as a part of the period of stay or detention or sentence of imprisonment contained in the final order
of the court or the Board.
91. Monitoring by National Commission for Protection of Child Rights and State Commissions
for Protection of Child Rights.- (1) In addition to the functions specified under the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006), the National Commission or the State Commissions may
perform following functions in consultation with the Central and State Government, namely:
(i) review setting up of institutions created under the Act;
(ii) develop Information, Education and Communication (IEC) material on child rights and gender
sensitivity;
(iii) develop protocols for reformation and rehabilitation of children;
(iv) create awareness about identification and reporting of crimes against children such as drug abuse,
trafficking, child sexual abuse and exploitation including child marriage, and other aspects of
violence against children;
(v) conduct sensitisation workshops for panchayati raj institutions and municipal corporations on crimes
against children including identification and reporting of crimes for enhanced protection;
(vi) develop information material detailing the rights of the child victims or witnesses and their families,
and containing useful information in local languages, which may be provided to the victim and
her/his family;
(vii) develop training module for stake holders along with the State Child Protection Societies and
National Institute of Public Cooperation and Child Development etc.
92. Inquiry in case of a Missing Child.- (1) A missing child is a child, whose whereabouts are not
known to the parents, legal guardian or any other person or institution legally entrusted with the custody of
the child, whatever may be the circumstances or causes of disappearance, and shall be considered
missing and in need of care and protection until located or his safety and well-being established.
(2) When a complaint is received about a child who is missing, the police shall register a First
Information Report forthwith.
(3) The police shall inform the Child Welfare Police Officer and forward the FIR to the Special
Juvenile Police Unit for immediate action for tracing the child.
(4) The police shall:
(i) collect a recent photograph of the missing child and make copies for District Missing Persons Unit,
Missing Persons Squad, National Crime Records Bureau/ Media etc.;
(ii) fill the form on the designated portal;
(iii) fill the specific designed 'Missing Persons Information Form' and immediately send to Missing
Persons Squad, District Missing Persons Unit, National Crime Record Bureau, State Crime
Records Bureau, Central Bureau of Investigation, and other related institutions;
(iv) send the copy of the First Information Report by post/email to the office of the nearest Legal
Services Authority along with addresses and contact phone numbers of parents or guardian of

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 249
the missing child or the Child Care Institution, after uploading the relevant information onto the
designated portal;
(v) prepare sufficient number of Hue and Cry notices containing photograph and physical description
of the missing child to be sent for publication.
(vi) give wide publicity by publishing or telecasting the photographs and the description of the missing
child, as feasible in (a) leading newspapers (b) Television/electronic media (c) local cable
television network and social media and thereafter submit for ratification by the Board or the
Committee or the Children’s Court, as the case may be.
(vii) give wide publicity in the surrounding area through the use of loud speakers and the distribution
and affixture of Hue and Cry notice at prominent places. Social networking portals, Short
Message Service alerts and slides in cinema halls can be used to reach out to the masses;
(viii) distribute Hue and Cry notice at all the outlets of the city or town, that is, railway stations, bus
stands, airports, regional passport offices and other prominent places;
(ix) search areas and spots of interest such as movie theatres, shopping malls, parks, amusement
parks, games parlours and areas where missing or run away children frequent should be
identified and watched;
(x) scan the recordings of the Closed Circuit Television Cameras installed in the vicinity of the area
from where the child was reported missing and on all possible routes and transit destination
points like bus stands, railway stations, and other places;
(xi) inquire from under construction sites, unused buildings, hospitals, and clinics,childline services, and
other local outreach workers, railway police, and other places;
(xii) details of missing children should be sent to the District Crime Record Bureaus of the neighbouring
States and Station House Officers (SHOs) of the bordering police stations including in-charge of
all police posts in their jurisdiction and shall conduct regular interaction with the concerned so
that follow up action is ensured.
(5) Where a child cannot be traced within a period of four months, the investigation of the case shall be
transferred to the Anti Human Trafficking Unit in the District which shall make reports every three months to
the District Legal Services Authority regarding the progress made in the investigation.
(6) When a child is traced:
(i) he shall be produced before the Board or the Committee or the Children’s Court, as the case may
be, for appropriate directions;
(ii) the police shall send a report to the District Legal Services Authority which shall provide counselling
and support services to the child and the family; and
(iii) the police shall conduct an inquiry whether the child has been subjected to any offence under the
Act or any other law and if so, proceed accordingly.
(7) The Central Government or the State Government may develop appropriate Standard Operating
Procedures for the manner of inquiry in cases of missing children to give effect to these rules.
93. Non-Compliance of the Act and the Rules: Any officer/institution, statutory body etc., who fails to
comply with the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder, the State Government may take
action against such officer/ institution, statutory body etc. after due inquiry and simultaneously make
alternative arrangements for discharge of functions for effective implementation of the Act.
94. Repeal.- The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 notified vide G.S.R.
679(E) dated 26th October, 2007 and as amended vide GSR 903(E) dated 26th December 2011,are hereby
repealed:
Provided that any action taken or order issued under the provisions of the Rules of 2007 prior to the
notification of these rules shall, in so far it is not inconsistent with the provisions of these rules, be deemed
to have been taken or issued under the provisions of these rules.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
250 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 1
[Rules 8 (1), 8 (5)]
SOCIAL BACKGROUND REPORT
FIR/DD No ………………………………………
U/Sections ……………………………………….
Police Station ……………………………………….
Date & Time ………………………………………
Name of I.O. ……………………………………….
Name of CWPO ………………………………………..
1. Name …………………………………………………………………………………
2. Father/Mother/Guardian’s name…………………………………………………..
3. Age/ Date of birth …………………………………………………………………..
4. Address………………………………………………………………………………..
5. Religion
(i) Hindu (OC/ BC/ SC/ ST)
(ii) Muslim/ Christian/ Other (pl. specify)
6. Whether the child is differently abled:
(i) Hearing Impairment
(ii) Speech Impairment
(iii) Physically disabled
(iv) Mentally disabled
(v) Others (please specify)
7. Family Details:
S.No. Name and Age Sex Education Occupation Income Health History Addictions
Relationship status of
(if any)
Mental
Illness
(if any)
(1) (2) (8)
(3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (9) (10)
8. Reasons for leaving home ………………………………………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 251
9. Whether there is a history of involvement of family members in offences, if any
10. Habits of the child
Yes No
A B
i) Smoking i) Watching TV/movies
ii) Alcohol consumption ii) Playing indoor/ outdoor games
iii) Drug use (specify) iii) Reading books
iv) Gambling iv) Drawing/painting/acting/singing
v) Begging v) Any other
vi) Any other
11. Employment Details, if any…………………………………………………………
12. Details of income utilization:
Yes No
(i) Sent to family to meet family need
(ii) Used by self for:
Yes No
a) For dress materials Yes/No
b) For gambling Yes/No
c) For alcohol Yes/No
d) For drug Yes/No
e) For smoking Yes/No
f) Savings Yes/No
13. The details of education of the child:
(i) Illiterate
(ii) Studied up to V Standard
(iii) Studied above V Standard but below VIII Standard
(iv) Studied above VIII Standard but below X Standard
(v) Studied above X Standard
14. The reason for leaving School
(i) Failure in the class last studied
(ii) Lack of interest in the school activities
(iii) Indifferent attitude of the teachers
(iv) Peer group influence
(v) To earn and support the family
(vi) Sudden demise of parents
(vii) Bullying in school
(viii) Rigid school atmosphere

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
252 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(ix) Absenteeism followed by running away from school
(x) No age appropriate school nearby
(xi) Abuse in school
(xii) Humiliation in school
(xiii) Corporal punishment
(xiv) Medium of instruction
(xv) Others (pl. specify)
15. The details of the school in which studied last:
(i) Corporation/Municipal/Panchayat
(ii) Government/SC Welfare School/BC Welfare School
(iii) Private management
(iv) School under NCLP
16. Vocational training, if any …………………………………………………………
17. Majority of the friends are
(i) Educated
(ii) Illiterate
(iii) The same age group
(iv) Older in age
(v) Younger in age
(vi) Same sex
(vii) Opposite sex
(viii) Addicts
(ix) With criminal background
18. Whether the child has been subjected to any form of abuse: Yes/No
S.No. Type of Abuse Remarks
1. Verbal abuse – parents/siblings/
employers/others , (pl. specify)
2. Physical abuse(pl. specify)
3. Sexual abuse parents/siblings/
Employers/others (pl. specify)
4. Others (pl. specify)
Yes No
19. Whether the child is a victim of any offence:
20. Whether the child is used by any gangs or adults or group of adults or has been used for drug
peddling:
Yes No

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 253
21. Reason for alleged offence such as parental neglect or over protection, peer group influence etc.
…………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………
22. Circumstances in which the child was apprehended ……………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
23. Details of articles recovered from the child: ……………………………………….
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
24. Alleged role of the child in the offence:……………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
25. Suggestions of Child Welfare Police Officer……………………………………….
…………………………………………………………………………………………..
………………………………………………………………………………………….
Signed by
Child Welfare Police Officer
FORM 2
[Rule 8 (7)]
UNDERTAKING BY THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR FIT PERSON GIVEN INTERIM CUSTODY
PENDING INQUIRY
Whereas I, …………… (Name) resident of House no.……. Street ………...
Village/Town……………………….District………………..State……………..do hereby declare that I am willing
to take charge of (name of the child)…………………….. aged……………. under the orders of the Board
……………………. subject to the following terms and conditions:
1. That I have annexed true, correct and authentic identification and address proof of myself.
2. That I undertake to produce him/her before the Board as and when required.
3. That I shall do my best for the welfare and education of the child as long as he/ she remains in my
charge and shall make proper provision for his/her maintenance.
4. That in the event of his/her illness, he/she shall have proper medical attention in the nearest
hospital and a report of it followed by a fitness certificate shall be submitted before the Board.
5. That I shall do my best to ensure that the child will not be subjected to any form of abuse/ neglect
or exploitation
6. That if his/her conduct requires further supervision or care and protection, I shall at once inform the
Board.
7. That if the child goes out of my charge or control, I shall immediately inform the Board.
Date this ……………………..day of ………………..20
Signature of person executing the Undertaking/ Bond
(Signed before me)
Juvenile Justice Board

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
254 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 3
[Rule 10 (1)(iii)]
SUPERVISION ORDER
When the child is placed under the care of a fit person/fit institution/Probation Officer pending
inquiry FIR/DD No. ………… of………… 20……….PS…………...
Whereas …………………. (name of the child) is alleged to have committed an offence and is
placed under the care of (Name)…………………………….. (address)……………………………………on
executing a bond by the said …………………………………. and the Board is satisfied that it is expedient to
deal with the said child by making an order placing him/her under supervision.
It is hereby ordered that the said child be placed under the supervision of …………………………for
a period of……………subject to the following conditions:
1. That the child shall reside at………………… for a period of…………..and shall be produced before the
Board as and when directed.
2. That the child shall not be allowed to quit the district jurisdiction of …………..without the permission of
the Board.
3. That the child shall not be allowed to associate with such person who shall negatively influence the
child.
4. That the person under whose care the child is placed shall arrange for the proper care, education and
welfare of the child.
5. That the preventive measures will be taken by the person under whose care the child is placed to see
that the child does not commit any offence punishable by any law in India.
6. That the child shall be prevented from taking narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or any other
intoxicants. The person under whose supervision the child is placed shall report any such act of the
child to the Board.
Dated this…………….day of……………………………. 20……………
(Signature)
Principal Magistrate/ Member Juvenile
Justice Board
Note: Additional, conditions, if any may be inserted by the Juvenile Justice Board.
FORM 4
[Rule 10 (1)(iv)]
ORDER OF PLACING A CHILD IN CHILD CARE INSTITUTION PENDING INQUIRY
To
The Officer in charge
Whereas on the…………day of…………..20……., ………….(Name of the child), son/ daughter
of……………………aged………..,residing at ………………………………… alleged to be involved in FIR/DD
No. ………………… PS ……………………is ordered by the Juvenile Justice Board to be kept in the Child
Care Institution (Observation Home/ Place of Safety) namely ………… for a period of ……………………..

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 255
This is to authorize and require you to receive the said child into your charge, and to keep him in
the Child Care Institution (Observation Home/ Place of Safety)……………………………….. and to produce
the child as and when directed by the Board, for the aforesaid order to be carried into execution according
to law.
Next date of hearing……………………….
Given under my hand and the seal of Juvenile Justice Board
This ………………….. day of ……………….. 20……………
(Signature)
Principal Magistrate/Member
Juvenile Justice Board
FORM 5
[Rule 10 (2)]
ORDER FOR SOCIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT
FIR No………………………………
U/Sections…………………………..
Police Station…………………………………….
To,
Probation Officer/ Person in-charge of Voluntary or Non-Governmental Organization.
Whereas ………………(Name of the Child), son/daughter of………………. age ……….residing
at………………………………., has been produced before the Board.
You are hereby directed to enquire into the social antecedents, family background and
circumstances of the alleged offence by the said child and submit your social investigation report on or
before ……………….or within such time as allowed to you by the Board.
You are also hereby directed to consult an expert in child psychology, psychiatric treatment or
counselling or any other expert for their expert opinion if necessary and submit such report along with your
Social Investigation Report.
Dated this ………….day of …………………20……………….
(Signature)
Principal Magistrate/ Member
Juvenile Justice Board

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
256 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 6
[Rules 10 (9), 11 (2), 64(1), 64(3)(i)]
SOCIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT
FOR CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
Sl. No………….
Submitted to the Juvenile Justice Board............................ (address).
Probation Officer/ Voluntary/Non- Governmental Organization………….. (Name of the person)
FIR No………………………………
Under sections………………………
Police Station………………………..
Nature of offence alleged: Petty Serious Heinous
1. Name………………………………………………………………………………
2. Age/Date/Year of birth………………………………………………………….
3. Sex…………………………………
4. Caste………………………………
5. Religion………………………….
6. Father’s Name……………………………………………………………………..
7. Mother’s Name ……………………………………………………………………
8. Guardian’s Name…………………………………………………………………
9. Permanent Address………………………………………………………………
10. Landmark of the address………………………………………………………..
11. Address of last residence………………………………………………………..
12. Contact no. of father/mother/family member…………………………………….
13. Whether the child is differently abled: Yes/No
(i) Hearing Impairment
(ii) Speech Impairment
(iii) Physically disabled
(iv) Mentally disabled
(v) Others (please specify)
14. Family Details:
S.No Name and Age Sex Education Occupation Income Health History Addic-
Relationship status of tions
Mental (if
(8)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) Illness any)
(if any)
(10)
(9)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 257
15. If the child or person is married, name, age and details of spouse and children:
…………………………………………………………………………………………………......................................
..................................................................................................
16. Relationship among the family members:
i. Father & mother Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
ii. Father & child Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
iii. Mother & child Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
iv. Father & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
v. Mother & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
vi. Child & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
vii. Child & grandparents (paternal/maternal) Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
17. History of involvement of family members in offences, if any:
S. Relationship Nature of Legal status Arrest if Period of Punishment
No. of the case any made confinement awarded
Crime
1. Father
2. Step father
3. Mother
4. Step mother
5. Brother
6. Sister
7. Others
(uncle/
aunty/
grandparents)
18. Attitude towards religion of child and family………………………………………….
19. Present living conditions ……………………………………………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
258 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
20. Other factors of importance if any…………………………………………………….
21. (i) Habits of the child (Tick as applicable)
A B
a) Smoking g) Watching TV/movies
b) Alcohol consumption h) Playing indoor/ outdoor games
c) Drug use (specify) i) Reading books
d) Gambling j) Religious activities
e) Begging k) Drawing/painting/acting/singing
f) Any other l) Any other
ii) Extra-curricular interests……………………………………………………………..
iii) Outstanding characteristics and personality traits…………………………………
22. Child’s opinion/reaction towards discipline in the home……………………………..
23. Employment Details of the child, if any………………………………………………...
24. Details of income utilization and manner of income utilization………………………
25. Work record (reasons for leaving vocational interests, attitude towards job or employers)………………
26. The details of education of the child:
i) Illiterate
ii) Studied up to V Standard
iii) Studied above V Standard but below VIII Standard
iv) Studied above VIII Standard but below X Standard
v) Studied above X Standard
27. Attitude of class mates towards the child………………………………………………
28. Attitude of teachers and classmates towards the child………………………………
29. The reason for leaving School (tick Yes/No as applicable)
i) Failure in the class last studied
ii) Lack of interest in the school activities
iii) Indifferent attitude of the teachers
iv) Peer group influence
v) To earn and support the family
vi) Sudden demise of parents
vii) Bullying in school
viii) Rigid school atmosphere
ix) Absenteeism followed by running away from school
x) There is no age appropriate school nearby
xi) Abuse in school
xii) Humiliation in school

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 259
xiii) Corporal punishment
xiv) Medium of instruction
xv) Others (pl. specify)
30. The details of the school in which studied last:
i) Corporation/Municipal/Panchayat
ii) Government/SC Welfare School/BC Welfare School
iii) Private management
iv) School under NCLP
31. Vocational training, if any…………………………………………………………….
32. Majority of the friends are
i) Educated
ii) Illiterate
iii) The same age group
iv) Older in age
v) Younger in age
vi) Same sex
vii) Opposite sex
viii) Addicts
ix) With criminal background
33. Attitude of the child towards friends…………………………………………………
34. Attitude of friends towards the child…………………………………………………
35. Observations of neighbours towards the child……………………………………..
36. Observations about neighborhood (to assess the influence of neighborhood on the
child)……………………………………………………………………………
37. Whether the child has been subjected to any form of abuse, if applicable:
Yes/No
S.No Type of Abuse Remarks
1. Verbal abuse – parents/ siblings / employers /
others , (pl. specify)
2. Physical abuse(pl. specify)
3. Sexual abuse parents/siblings/
Employers/others (pl. specify)
4. Others (pl. specify)
38. Whether the child is a victim of any offence: Yes/No
39. Whether the child is used by any gangs or adults or group of adults or has been
used for drug peddling: Yes/No

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
260 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
40. Does the child has tendency to run away from home, give details if any: Yes/No
41. Circumstances of apprehension of the child………………………………………….
42. Alleged role of the child in the offence……………………………………………….
43. Reason for alleged offence:
(i) Parental neglect
(ii) Parental overprotection
(iii) Parents criminal behaviour
(iv) Parents influence (negative)
(v) Peer group influence
(vi) Bad habits (to buy drugs/alcohol)
(vii) Others (pl. specify)
44. Whether the child has been apprehended earlier for any offence, if yes give details including stay in a
child care institution Yes/ No
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………
45. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any:
46. Physical appearance of the child:
47. Health condition of the child (including medical examination report, if
applicable)
48. Mental condition of the child:
49. Any other remark
RESULT OF INQUIRY
1. Emotional factors …………………………………………………………………
2. Physical condition ………………………………………………………………..
3. Intelligence ………………………………………………………………………
4. Social and economic factors……………………………………………………
5. Suggestive causes of the problems……………………………………………
6. Analysis of the case, including reasons/contributing factors for the offence
7. Opinion of experts consulted……………………………………………………
8. Recommendation regarding rehabilitation by Probation Officer/Child Welfare
Officer……………………………………………………………………………….
Signature of the Probation Officer/ Child Welfare Officer/ Social Worker
Stamp and Seal where available

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 261
FORM 7
[Rules 11(3), 13(7)(vi), 13(8)(ii), 19(4), 19(17), 62(6)(vii), 62(6)(x), 69 I (3)]
INDIVIDUAL CARE PLAN
Child in Conflict with Law/ Child in Need of Care and Protection
(tick whichever is applicable)
Name of Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer/Probation officer……………………
Date of preparing the ICP …………………………………………………………………
Case/Profile No……………of 20…………………
FIR No……………………………………………………….
U/Sections (Type of offence),applicable in case of Children in Conflict with Law……
Police Station………………………………………………………………………………….
Address of the Board or the Committee……………………………………………………
Admission No.(if child is in an institution)………………………………………………….
Date of Admission (if child is in an institution)……………………………………………
Stay of the child (Fill as applicable)
(i) Short term (up to six months)
(ii) Medium Term (six months to one year)
(iii) Long term (more than 1 year)
A. PERSONAL DETAILS (to be provided by child/parent/both on admission of the child in the institution)
1. Name of the Child…………………………………
2. Age/Date of Birth…………………………
3. Sex: Male/Female……………………
4. Father’s name:……………………………………..
5. Mother’s name……………………………………
6. Nationality…………………………………….
7. Religion……………………………………….
8. Caste…………………………………………
9. Language spoken…………………………..
10. Level of Education…………………………………………………………………..
11. Details of Savings Account of the child, if any…………………………………..
12. Details of child’s earnings and belongings, if any………………………………
13. Details of awards/rewards received by the child, if any…………………………
14. Based on the results of Case History, Social Investigation report and interaction
with the child, give details on following areas of concern and interventions
required, if any

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
S.No. Category Areas of concern Proposed Interventions
1. Child’s expectation from care and protection
2. Health and nutrition needs
3. Emotional and psychological support needs
4. Educational and Training needs
5. Leisure, creativity and play
Attachments and Inter-personal
6.
Relationships
7. Religious beliefs
Self care and life skill training for Protection
8. from all kinds of abuse, neglect and
maltreatment
9. Independent living skills
Any other such as significant experiences
which may have impacted the development
of the child like trafficking, domestic
10.
violence, parental neglect, bullying in school,
etc. (Please specify)
B. PROGRESS REPORT OF THE CHILD ( to be prepared every fortnight for first three months and
thereafter to be prepared once a month)
[Note: Use different sheet for Progress Report]
1. Name of the Probation Officer/Case Worker/Child Welfare Officer………………….
2. Period of the report………………………………………………………………………
3. Admission No……………………………………………………………………………..
4. Board or Committee…………………………………………………………………….
5. Profile No…………………………………………….
6. Name of the Child…………………………………..
7. Stay of the child (Fill as applicable)
(iv) Short term (up to six months)
(v) Medium Term (six months to one year)
(vi) Long term (more than 1 year)
8. Place of interview …………………….. Dates…………………….
9. General conduct and progress of the child during the period of the report
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
10. Progress made with regard to proposed interventions as mentioned in point 14 of Part A of this Form.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 263
S. No. Category Proposed Progress of the
Interventions child
1. Child’s expectation from care and protection
2. Health and nutrition needs
3. Emotional and psychological support needed
4. Educational and Training needs
5. Leisure, creativity and play
6. Attachments and Inter-personal Relationships
7. Religious beliefs
8. Self care and life skill training for Protection from
all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment
9. Independent living skills
10. Any other such as significant experiences which
may have impacted the development of the child
like trafficking, domestic violence, parental
neglect, bullying in school, etc. (Please specify)
11. Any proceedings before the Committee or Board or Children’s Court
(i) Variation of conditions of bond
(ii) Change of residence of the child
(iii) Other matters, if any
12. Period of supervision completed on………………………………………
Result of supervision with remarks (if any)………………………………….
Name and Addresses of the parent or guardian or fit person under whose care the child is to live after the
supervision is over……………………………………………
Date of report…………………Signature of the Probation Officer…………………..
C. PRE-RELEASE REPORT (to be prepared 15 days prior to release)
1. Details of place of transfer and authority concerned responsible in the place of
transfer/release
2. Details of placement of the child in different institutions/family
3. Training undergone and skills acquired
4. Last progress report of the child (to be attached, refer Part B)
5. Rehabilitation and restoration plan of the child ( to be prepared with reference to progress reports of the
child)
S.No. Category Rehabilitation and restoration plan of the
child
1. Child’s expectation from care and protection
2. Health and nutrition
3. Emotional and psychological
4. Educational and Training
5. Leisure, creativity and play
6. Attachments and Inter-personal Relationships
7. Religious belief
8. Self care and life skill training for Protection from
all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment
9. independent living skills
10. Any other

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
264 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
6. Date of release/transfer/repatriation…………………………………………………….
7. Requisition for escort if required……………………………………………………….
8. Identification Proof of escort such as driving license, Aadhar Card, etc…………
9. Recommended rehabilitation plan including possible placements/sponsorships….
10. Details of Probation Officer/non-governmental organization for post-release follow-
up………………………………………………………………………………..
11. Memorandum of Understanding with non-governmental organisation identified for post-release follow-
up (Attach a copy)………………………………………………..
12. Details of sponsorship agency/individual sponsor, if any…………………………..
13. Memorandum of Understanding between the sponsoring agency and individual sponsor (Attach a
copy)………………………………………………………………….
14. Medical examination report before release……………………………………………
15. Any other information…………………………………………………………………
D. POST-RELEASE/RESTORASTION REPORT OF THE CHILD
1. Status of Bank Account : Closed / Transferred
2. Earnings and belongings of the child: handed over to the child or his
parents/guardians – Yes/No
3. First interaction report of the Probation Officer/Child Welfare Officer/Case
Worker /social worker/non-governmental organisation identified for follow-up with
the child post-release……………………………………………………………………
4. Progress made with reference to Rehabilitation and Restoration Plan……………..
5. Family’s behavior/attitude towards the child…………………………………………….
6. Social milieu of the child, particularly attitude of neighbours/community…………….
7. How is the child using the skills acquired………………………………………………..
8. Whether the child has been admitted to a School or vocation? Give date and
name of the school/institute/any other agency Yes/No
………………………………………………………………………………………………
9. Report of second and third follow-up interaction with the child after two months
and six months respectively…………………………………………………………..
10 Efforts towards social mainstreaming and child’s opinion/views about it…………
11. Identity Cards and Compensation
[Instruction: Please verify with the physical documents]
IDENTITY CARDS Present status (Please tick whichever
is applicable)
Yes No Action taken
Birth Certificate
School certificate
Caste certificate
BPL Card
Disability Certificate
Immunization card
Ration Card
Adhaar Card
Received compensation from Government
Signature of the Probation Officer/Child Welfare Officer
Stamp and Seal where available

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 265
FORM 8
[Rule 11(6)]
UNDERTAKING/ BOND TO BE EXECUTED BY A PARENT/ GUARDIAN/ /FIT PERSON IN WHOSE CARE
A CHILD IN CONFLICT WITH LAW IS PLACED
Whereas I, ……………………. being the parent, guardian, relative or fit person under whose
care………………………..(name of the child) has been ordered to be placed by the Juvenile Justice
Board………………………… having been directed by the said Board to execute an undertaking/ bond with
surety in the sum of Rs………../- (Rupees……………………………………) or without surety, I hereby bind
myself to be responsible for the good behavior and well-being of the said ………………….and to observe
the following conditions for a period of ………………… years with effect from …………………………...
1. That I shall not change my place of residence without giving previous intimation in writing to the
Juvenile Justice Board through the Probation Officer;
2. That I shall not remove the said child from the limits of the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Justice Board
without previously obtaining the written permission of the Board;
3. That I shall send the said child daily to school/to such vocation as is approved by the Board unless
prevented from so doing by circumstances beyond control;
4. That I shall sincerely give effect to the Individual Care Plan with the help of the Probation Officer;
5. That I shall report immediately to the Board whenever so required by it and also produce the child
before the Board as and when directed to do so;
6. That I shall produce the said child in my care before the Board, if he/she does not follow the orders of
Board or his/her behavior is beyond my control;
7. That I shall report to the Board if the child goes out of my control or charge;
8. That I shall render all necessary assistance to the Probation Officer to enable him to carry out the
duties of supervision;
In the event of my making default herein, I undertake to appear before the Board and bind myself to pay to
Government the sum of Rs ……………….. (Rupees…………………………….).
Dated this ………………..day of ……………………………..20.
Signature of person executing the Undertaking/Bond.
(Signed before me)
Principal Magistrate/ Member Juvenile Justice Board
Additional conditions, if any, by the Juvenile Justice Board may be entered numbering them properly;
(Where a bond with sureties is to executed add)
I/We …………………………..of ………………………(place of residence with full particulars) hereby declare
myself/ourselves as surety/sureties for the aforesaid ……………….. (name of the person executing the
undertaking/bond) to adhere to the terms and conditions of this undertaking/bond. In case of
………………….(name of the person executing the bond) making fault therein, I/We hereby bind
myself/ourselves jointly or severally to forfeit to government the sum of Rs………………/-
(Rupees…………………………….) dated this the……….. day of …………….20…………..in the presence of
…………………………
Signature of Surety(ties)
(Signed before me)
Principal Magistrate/ Member, Juvenile Justice Board

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
266 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 9
[Rules 11(7)]
PERSONAL BOND BY CHILD
Whereas I, ……………………inhabitant of……………………..(give full particulars such as house
number, road, village/town, tehsil, district, state) have been ordered to be sent back/restored by the Juvenile
Justice Board …………………..under section ……….. of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015 on my entering into a personal bond to observe the conditions mentioned herein below.
Now, therefore, I do solemnly promise to abide by these conditions during the
period…………………………...
I hereby bind myself as follows:
1. That during the period………….. I shall not ordinarily leave the village/town/district to which I am
sent and shall not ordinarily return to…………………….or go anywhere else beyond the said district
without the prior permission of the Board;
2. That during the said period I shall attend school/ vocational training in the village/town or in the said
district to which I am sent;
3. That in case of my attending school/ vocational training at any other place in the said district I shall
keep the Board informed of my ordinary place of residence.
I hereby acknowledge that I am aware of the above conditions which have been read
over/explained to me and that I accept the same.
(Signature or thumb impression of the child)
Certified that the conditions specified in the above order have been read over/explained to (Name
of child) ……………………..and that he has accepted them as the conditions upon non-compliance of which
he/she may be placed in safe custody.
Certified accordingly that the said child has been released/ relieved on (date) ………………….
Signature
Principal Magistrate/Members
Juvenile Justice Board

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 267
FORM 10
[Rules 11(9) and 64 (3) (xiii)]
PERIODIC REPORT BY PROBATION OFFICER WHEN A CHILD IS RELEASED ON PROBATION
FIR No……………. Police Station …………..U/Sections……………
In the matter of……………….. vs……………………………………
Whereas (name of the child) ………………….., age…………, has on……. (date) been found to be a
child in conflict with law, and has been placed under the care of ……………… (parent/ guardian/ fit
person/fit facility) and under the supervision of …………………(name of Probation Officer)
Reg. No. :- Age (approximately) :- Sex:- Male / Female /
Name:- Fathers Name:- Religion:-
Vocational Training, if any
Education: - Language(s) known:-
Next court date:- Date of admission (in case of fit
Employment, if any
person/fit facility)
Case details and summary
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
1. Preliminary details:
(i) Visit Date: ………………./…………………../………………………..
(ii) Name of Parent / Guardian……………………………………………………….
(iii) Names of Other Adults Living in the Home and with whom the Probation Officer interacted:
2. Observations:
(i) Child’s behaviors……………………………………………………………………..
(ii) Physical and mental health status/needs of child and family…………………….
(iii) Inter-personal relationship of the child with the family…………………………….
(iv) Inter-personal relationship with friends……………………………………………..
(v) Safety and supervision in the family………………………………………………...
(vi) Difficulties faced by the child……………………………………………………….
(vii) Difficulties faced by the family……………………………………………………..
(viii) Changes in the household…………………………………………………………
(ix) Vocational training, if any being undertaken by the child……………………….
(x) Engagement of child in any anti-social activities or harmful activities (Examples could be exhibiting
bullying behaviour, violent outbursts, destructions, self-harm, lying, defiance, impulsiveness, lack of
empathy, sexually deviant actions etc.)……………………………………………………………………
(xi) Time elapsed since last engagement in any anti-social behavior or harmful activities………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
3. Visit to school/ vocational training centre
(i) Name of the school/centre……………………………………………………….
(ii) Name of the Teacher / Principal met…………………………………………….
(iii) Any unusual behavior observed……………………………………………………
(iv) Feedback received on the progress of the child………………………………….
(v) Attitude of the peers towards the child…………………………………………..
(vi) Attitude of the child towards the peers…………………………………………..
4. Visit to place of employment:
(i) Nature of work………………………………………………………………..
(ii) Working hours……………………………………………………………….
(iii) Attitude of the child towards work………………………………………..
(iv) Violation of any labour laws, Low wages or wages being withheld, if observed and action
taken against employer……………………………….
5. Did you spend time speaking privately with the child Yes □ No □
If no, give reasons……………………………………..
6. Progress made as per Rehabilitation and Restoration Plan under the Individual Care Plan (refer point 14
of form 7)…………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
7. Recommendations for modifications in Rehabilitation and Restoration Plan under the Individual Care Plan
, if any:
Prepared by: ……………………………………..…
(Probation Officer …../.…./.… (date)
Plan: Date of next visit: ……………………
Action point if any: ………………………………
Signature
(Probation Officer)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 269
FORM 11
[Rule 12(1)]
CASE MONITORING SHEET
(Separate Sheet may be used in case there are more than one child)
Juvenile Justice Board, District………………
Case No. .............................of.............................
Case Name:
Police Station ................................................ Date.........................................................
U/S................................................................... FIR/ GD/ DD No. .......................................
Name of Probation Officer............................... Name of IO ..............................................
Name of Lawyer ............................................. Name of Child Welfare Police Officer......
(If not represented provide Legal Aid Lawyer)
NATURE OF OFFENCE
PETTY
(maximum punishment upto three years)
SERIOUS
(maximum punishment between three to seven years)
HEINOUS
(minimum punishment for seven years or more)
PARTICULARS OF CHILD
Name Parents/ Guardian with Present address Permanent address
Contact No.
DΑΤΕ ΑΝD ΤΙΜΕ CHILD ΑΡΡRΕΗΕΝDED
DATE AND TIME OF FIRST PRODUCTION
DATE OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION UNDER SECTION 54 Cr.P.C.
ΑGΕ DΕΤΕRΜΙΝΑΤΙΟΝ
Age on the Date of offence
Date of age Determination
Time taken for age determination
Determination by BOARD COURT
Evidence Relied: Documents Medical

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
270 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
CUSΤΟDΥ ΟF ΤΗΕ CHILD
In Observation Home/ Place of Safety Date of grant of bail Sent under supervision
(Name of Institution)
From....................То.........................
PROGRESS OF INQUIRY
(Time schedule for disposal of the case to be fixed on the first day of hearing)
Steps to be taken Scheduled Date Actual Date
Day 1: Social Background Report by Police (in Form No. 1) Dated……..
Day 1: Consideration of Bail Dated……..
Day 2: Age determination Dated………
Day 2: SIR (Form No.6) by Probation Officer Dated……….
Day 2: Section 173 CrPC Final Report by Police on completion of Dated……….
Investigation
Day 3: Submission of Report on Provisions of further investigation, if Dated…………
any
Day 3: Section 251 CrPC Notice Dated………….
Day 4-6: Prosecution Evidence Dated……..
(From……… to…….) Dated………
Depending on the number of witnesses continuous dates may be fixed) Dated……….
Day 7: Statement of child under Section 281 CrPC Dated…………
Day 8: Defence Evidence Dated………..
Day 8: Individual Care Plan (In case of child in institutional care Dated………….
Individual Care Plan should be prepared within one month of admittance
Day 9: Final Arguments Dated…………
Day 10: Dispositional (Final) Order Dated………..
Day 11: Post Dispositional Review Dated…………
signed by
Juvenile Justice Board

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 271
FORM 12
[Rule 12(2)]
QUARTERLY REPORT BY JUVENILE JUSTICE BOARD
District
Quarterly Report for the period: From…………… to…………..
Details of JJB
S.No. Details Date of Appointment Training attended
1. Principal Magistrate
2. Member 1
3. Member 2
4. Member 3
VISIT TO HOMES BY PRINCIPAL MAGISTRATE
Date of visit:
Name and Address of Home :
Remark:
VISIT TO JAILS BY PRINCIPAL MAGISTRATE
Date of Visit:
Whether any children found:
Action taken:
CASES INSTITUTED DURING THE QUARTER:
PETTY SERIOUS HEINOUS ΤΟΤΑL
Number cases
Number of Children
Children granted bail
Children sent to
Observation Home
Number of cases where
preliminary reports were
submitted in stipulated
time

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
ΡΕΝDΕΝCΥ ΟF CΑSΕS
Nature of Old New Disposal Current pendency
case cases cases
Less than 4 months to 6 months More than
4 months 6 months to 1 year 1 year
Petty
Serious
Heinous
Total
FINAL ORDER
Total number of final orders passed
Discharged Transf Abated Repatriate Transferre Declared Terminated Acquitted/
er to on d to d to Compounded under rule Finding of
other Death Foreign Children’s & file ……. commission
JJB Country Court consigned (post- in offence
production
process)
Nature of Dispositional Orders where child has committed Offence (mention the No. of orders)
COMPLAINT/SUGGESTION, IF ANY, RECEIVED AND ACTION TAKEN
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________
REMARK/SUGGESTION BY BOARD
a. Principal Magistrate ________________________________________________________________
b. Member : 1 ________________________________________________________________
c. Member: 2 ________________________________________________________________
Principal Magistrate Member –1 Member -2

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 273
FORM 13
[Rules 13(8)(iv)]
PERIODIC REVIEW OF A CHILD IN PLACE OF SAFETY
FIR No……………………………….. PS…………..U/Sections
In the matter of ……………………… vs. …………………………..
Whereas (name of the child) …………………..,age……….., has on ………………(date) been found
to be a child in conflict with law, and has been placed in.................................................. (Name of place of
safety)
Date of admission to place of safety –
Period of Review: From……………… to……………..
Name of the Child…………………………………………………………………
Father’s Name……………………………………………………………………
Date of admission……………………………………………………………
Next date of hearing………………………………………………………..
1. Case details and summary
……………………………………………………………...……………………………………………………………
………………………………….…………………………………
2. Individual Care Plan (Attach a copy)
…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………
3. Fortnightly progress made as per Individual Care Plan
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………….
4. Development of new interests
…………………………………………………………….……………………………………………………………
………………………………….
5. Psycho-social progress made by the child: (to be prepared with the help of a psycho-social
expert)………………………………………………………………………
I. Mental Status Evaluation
a. Appearance (Observed) - Possible descriptors: • posture, clothes, grooming.
b. Behavior (Observed) - Possible descriptors: • Mannerisms, gestures, psychomotor activity,
expression, eye contact, ability to follow commands/requests, compulsions
II. Attitude (Observed) - Possible descriptors: • Cooperative, hostile, open, secretive, evasive, suspicious,
apathetic, easily distracted, focused, defensive.
III. Level of Consciousness (Observed) - Possible descriptors: • Vigilant, alert, drowsy, lethargic,
stuporous, asleep, comatose, confused, fluctuating.
IV. Orientation (Inquired) – Possible questions: • “What is your full name?” • “Where are we at (floor,
building, city, county, and state)?” • “What is the full date today (date, month, year, day of the week,
and season of the year)?” • “How would you describe the situation we are in?”
V. Speech and Language (Observed) A. Quantity - Possible descriptors: • Talkative, spontaneous, quiet
B. Rate - Possible descriptors: • Fast, slow, normal, pressured. C. Volume (Tone).

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
274 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
VI. Mood (Inquired): A sustained state of inner feeling – Possible questions: • “How are you feeling?” •
“Have you been discouraged/depressed/low?” • “Have you been energized/elated/high/out of control
lately?” • “Have you been angry/irritable?”
VII. Affect (Observed): An observed expression of inner feeling.
VIII. Thought Processes or Thought Form (Inquired/Observed): logic, relevance, organization, flow and
coherence of thought in response to general questioning during the interview. - Possible descriptors:
goal-directed, circumstantial, loose associations, incoherent, evasive, perseveration.
IX. Thought Content (Inquired/Observed)
X. Suicidality and Homicidality – Assessment
XI. Insight (Inquired/Observed) –
XII. Attention (Inquired/Observed) –
XIII. Feelings of guilt/ remorse: present/ absent
6. Status of Current Educational/ Vocational Rehabilitation Programme
• Motivation for the programme…………………………………………………….
• Level of cooperativeness…………………………………………………………..
• Regularity…………………………………………………………………………….
• Quality of work/performance………………………………………………………
7. Impact of institutionalization on the person……………………………………….
8. Approach to evaluation/ periodic follow ups………………………………………
Willingness /ability to participate in treatment and rehabilitation in programs/facilities, consistent with public
safety.
RECOMMENDATIONS (including whether the person may be released or released on conditions or
requires further institutionalization with justification)
DATE : / /
PLACE :
NAME :
DESIGNATION :
SIGNATURE :
Recommendations/Findings: ………………
Signature / Seal
Prepared by: ……………………………………..…
(Probation Officer …../.…./.… (date)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 275
FORM 14
[Rules 7 (1) (ii), 13(8)(iv)( C ) (cd), 17(vi), 19(20), 65(3)(viii), 69E(2), 69 I (4), 69J(1), 69J(3)]
REHABILITATION CARD
FIR No. /Case No.
U/Sections
PS
Nature of Offence: heinous, serious or petty (in case of child in conflict with law)
Name of Probation Officer/Child Welfare Officer/Rehabilitation cum Placement Officer:
………………………………………………..
Name of the child:
Age:
Sex:
Father’s name:
Mother’s name:
Admission No.
Date of Admission:
Date of Provisional Release / Release:
Services availed under Individual Care Plan –
Indicators Child’s expectation from care and protection
Plan :
First Month Outcome :
Plan :
Second Outcome :
Month
Plan :
Third Month Outcome :
Plan :
Fourth Outcome :
Month

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
276 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Health and Nutrition
Plan :
First Month Outcome :
Plan :
Second Outcome :
Month
Plan :
Third Month Outcome :
Plan :
Fourth Month Outcome :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 277
Emotional and psychological support needed
Plan :
First Month Outcome :
Plan :
Second Outcome :
Month
Plan :
Third Month Outcome :
Plan :
Fourth Outcome :
Month
Education and Training
Plan :
First Month Outcome :
Plan :
Second Outcome :
Month
Plan :
Third Month Outcome :
Plan :
Fourth Outcome :
Month

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
278 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Leisure, creativity and play
First Month Plan
Outcome
Second Plan
Month
Outcome
Third Month Plan
Outcome
Fourth Plan
Month
Outcome
Attachments and Inter-personal Relationships
First Month Plan
Outcome :
Second Plan
Month
Outcome :
Third Month Plan
Outcome :
Fourth Month Plan
Outcome :
Self Care and Life Skill Training for Protection from all kinds of abuse, neglect and maltreatment
First Month Plan
Outcome :
Second Plan
Month
Outcome :
Third Month Plan
Outcome :
Fourth Month Plan
Outcome :
Independent living skills
First Month Plan
Outcome :
Second Plan
Month
Outcome :
Third Month Plan
Outcome :
Fourth Month Plan
Outcome :

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 279
Any other such as significant experiences which may have impacted the
development of the child like trafficking, domestic violence, parental neglect,
bullying in school etc.
First Month Plan
Outcome :
Second Plan
Month
Outcome :
Third Month Plan
Outcome :
Fourth Month Plan
Outcome :
Other services provided to the child, including compensation, other benefits etc.
Report of the detailed psychiatric assessment done by certified psychiatrist to be attached along with
Rehabilitation card
Date of report and reason for conducting the said assessment (Provisional Release / Release/ Any
other)
1. Overall progress shown by the child on the above mentioned aspects of the Individual Care Plan
2. Child’s acceptance and understanding of his actions and its consequences
3. Child’s willingness to reform
4. Child’s behavior and conduct
5. Offence committed by the child , if any reported by family or neighbourhood, in case of a child in
conflict with law who is not placed in a Child Care Institution
Signed by
JJB/ CWC

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 15
[Rule 17 (1)(i)]
CASE SUMMARY MAINTAINED BY THE CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
Case No…………………………...
In Re…………………………………..
Case Record……………………..
1. Name of the child……………………………………………………..
2. Father’s/Mother’s/Guardian’s name (if available)………………….
3. Date of production of the child………………………………………
4. Name of person producing the child………………………………
5. A list of all follow up dates (of the child, before the Committee)………………...
6. Orders passed by the CWC (tick as applicable)
(i) Declaration that child is in need of care and protection.
(ii) Finding on age of child
(iii) Medical Examination
(iv) Interim custody
(v) Undertaking (by parent, guardian or fit person, if applicable)
(vi) Order appointing Case Worker & NGO etc.
(vii) Order for compensation/recovery of wages (if applicable)
(viii) Transfer order
(ix) Final Order (concluding inquiry)
(x) Any other order.
7. Medical Records including but not limited to age verification………………….
8. Social Investigation Report under Form 22………………………………………
9. Individual Care Plan under Form 7……………………………………………..
10. Rehabilitation Card in Form 14……………………………………………………
11. Case History Form 43………………………………………………………………
12. All details, documents and records with regards to Sponsorship/Foster Care/Adoption services (if
applicable).
Date:
Place:
(Signatures)
Child Welfare Committee

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 281
FORM 16
[Rules 17(1)(v), 20(2)]
QUARTERLY REPORT BY CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
District
Quarterly Report for the period: From…………… to…………..
Details of CWC
S.No. Details Date of Appointment Training attended
1. Chairperson
2. Member 1
3. Member 2
4. Member 3
5. Member 4
Details of Cases with CWC
S.No. Number of Number of Number of Number of Reasons for
cases at the cases received cases cases pending pendency
beginning of during the disposed of at the end of
Quarter quarter during the quarter
quarter
FINAL ORDER
Total number of final orders passed during the quarter
Released to Transfer Ordered to Repatriated Declare Ordered for Recomme Initiate
parent/guardian to other stay in to Foreign d legally foster care / nd to JJB process of
/fit person/fit CWC CCI Country free for sponsorship/ for filing compensati
institution adoption FIR on to child,
Aftercare
if eligible
VISIT TO HOMES BY CHAIRPERSON/ MEMBERS
Date of visit:
Name and Address of Home visited:
Remarks/Suggestions of the Committee……………..
Signature of Chairperson
Seal

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
282 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 17
[Rules 18(2), 19(25)]
REPORT TO BE SUBMITTED AT TIME OF PRODUCTION
OF CHILD BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
Case No……………………….
Produced before the Child Welfare Committee……………………………………….
Date of production……………………… Time of production……………………..
Place of production…………………………………
1. Details of person who is producing the child:
(i) Name of the person ………………………….
(ii) Age………………………..
(iii) Sex…………………………
(iv) Address …………………
(v) Contact number…………………
(vi) Occupation/ designation………………..
(vii) Name of the organization/CCI/SAA ………………….
2. The child who is being produced:
(i) Name (if any)………………………..
(ii) Age (stated age/ age based on appearance) ……………
(iii) Sex …………
(iv) Identity mark/s………………………………………
(v) Language used by the child………………………..
3. Details of parents / guardians (if available):
(i) Name …………………………………
(ii) Age…………………………………..
(iii) Address……………………………….
(iv) Contact number……………………….
(v) Occupation…………………………………
4. Place where the child was found…………………………….
5. The details of the person (if any) with whom the child was found:
i. Name ………………………
ii. Age…………………………….
iii. Address……………………………….
iv. Contact number…………………………
v. Occupation……………………….
6. Circumstances under which the child was found……………………….
7. Allegation by the child of any offence/ abuse committed on the child in any manner………………………
8. Physical condition of the child…………………………………………..
9. Belongings of the child at the time of production……………………………..
10. Date and Time at which the child came to the CCI/SAA………………………….
11. Immediate efforts made to trace family of the child ……………………………..
12. Medical treatment, if provided to the child ……………………………..
13. Whether police has been informed …………………………………………….
Signature/ Thumb impression of the child
Signature/ Thumb impression of the person who produced the child
Police-Local Police/Special Juvenile Police Unit/ designated child welfare police officer / Railway
Police/Probation Officers/ any public servant/Social Welfare Organization/Social Worker/ Person in-charge
CCI/ SAA/ any citizen/Child himself/herself (fill as applicable)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 283
FORM 18
[Rules 18 (5), 18 (9) and 19 (26) ]
ORDER OF PLACEMENT OF A CHILD IN AN INSTITUTION
(Children’s Home/Fit Facility/SAA)
Case No………………………………
To,
The Officer-in-Charge,
Whereas on the …………………..day of …………….20 …………. (name of the child)
……………………., son/daughter of ………………. aged ………..residing at …………………. being in care
and protection under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act 2015 is ordered by the Child Welfare
Committee …………………, to be kept in the Children’s Home/SAA/Fit Facility……………………..for a
period of …………………
This is to authorize and require you to receive the said child in your charge, and to keep him/her in
the Children’s Home/ Fit Facility /SAA……………….. for the aforesaid order to be carried into execution
according to law. The concerned official shall upload the details in case of an orphan or abandoned child in
the TrackChild/ relevant Web Portal.
Given under my hand and the seal of Child Welfare Committee.
This ……………. day of ………………………..
(Signature)
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
Encl:
Copy of the orders, particulars of home and previous record, case history and individual care plan, as
applicable:
FORM 19
[Rule 18(8)]
ORDER FOR PLACEMENT OF CHILD UNDER THE CARE OF A PARENT, GUARDIAN OR FIT
PERSON PENDING INQUIRY
Case No. …….of ……………….20………………………
In Re…………………
Whereas (name of the child) …………………… has on …………….(date) been found to be in need
of care and protection, and is placed under the care and supervision of (name)……………………..
(address)…………………..on executing a bond by the said ………………….. and the Committee is satisfied
that it is expedient to deal with the said child by making an order placing him/her under supervision.
Reason for the child being produced before the CWC……………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………….
It is hereby ordered that the said child be placed under the supervision of
(name)……………………….. (address)……………………………… for a period of
……………………………………….. This shall be subject to the following conditions that:
1. the child along with the copies of the order and the bond, if any, executed by the
said…………………………. shall be produced before the Committee as and when required by the
person executing the bond
2. the child shall reside at ……………………….. for a period of ………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
284 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
3. the child shall not be allowed to quit the district jurisdiction of …………………without the permission of
the Committee.
4. the child shall go to school/ vocational training centre regularly. The child shall attend
……………….(name of) school/ vocational training centre (if already identified) at
………………….(address of school/ vocational training centre).
5. the person under whose care the child is placed shall arrange for the proper care, education and
welfare of the child.
6. the child shall not be allowed to associate with undesirable characters and shall be prevented from
coming in conflict with law.
7. the child shall be prevented from taking narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or any other
intoxicants.
8. the directions given by the Committee from time to time, for the due observance of the conditions
mentioned above, shall be carried out.
Dated this ______________day of _____________20 _____________
(Signature)
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
• Additional conditions, if any may be inserted by the Child Welfare Committee
FORM 20
[Rule 18(8) and 19 (7)]
UNDERTAKING BY THE PARENT OR GUARDIAN OR ‘FIT PERSON’
I …………………….resident of House no………………Street …………….. Village/Town
………….District ……………… State ………………..do hereby declare that I am willing to take charge of
(name of the child) …………….. Aged……. under the orders of the Child Welfare
Committee…………………. subject to the following terms and conditions:
1. If his conduct is unsatisfactory I shall at once inform the Committee.
2. I shall do my best for the welfare and education of the said child as long as he remains in my
charge and shall make proper provision for his maintenance.
3. In the event of his/her illness, he shall have proper medical attention in the nearest hospital.
4. I agree to adhere to the conditions that may be imposed by the Committee from time to time and
also to keep the Committee informed about the compliance with the conditions.
5. I undertake to produce him/her before the Committee as and when required.
6. I shall inform the Committee immediately if the child goes out of my charge or control.
Date this ………………day of ………………..
Signature
Signed before Child Welfare Committee

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 285
FORM 21
[Rule 19(3)]
ORDER FOR SOCIAL INVESTIGATION REPORT OF CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
To
Child Welfare Officer/ Social Worker/Case Worker/ Person in-charge of Home/ representative of
Non- Governmental Organization
Whereas a report under section 31 (2) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015 has been received from …………………. in respect of (name of the child)……………, aged
(approximate)………, son/daughter of …………………………residing at……………………, who has been
produced before the Committee under section 31 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015.
You are hereby directed to conduct Social Investigation as per Form 22 for the above child. You are
directed to enquire into socio economic and family background of the said child.
You are directed to submit the Social Investigation Report on or before …………….. (date).
Dated this ………….day of …………………..20………………………
(Signature)
Chairperson/Member
Child Welfare Committee
FORM 22
[Rule 19(8)]
SOCIAL INVSTIGATION REPORT FOR CHILD IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
Sl. No……………………….
Produced before the Child Welfare Committee…………………..
Case No………………………………………
Social Investigation Report Prepared by: Child Welfare Officer/ Social Worker/Case Worker/ Person in-
charge of Home/ representative of Non- Governmental Organization
Details of child in need of care and protection:
1. Name…………………………………………………….
2. Age/Date/Year of birth………………………………..
3. Sex…………………………………………………………….
4. Caste…………………………………………………………
5. Religion……………………………………………………………
6. Father’s Name……………………………………………………
7. Mother’s Name ………………………………………………
8. Guardian’s Name………………………………………..
9. Permanent Address………………………………………..

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
286 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
10. Landmark of the address……………………………….
11. Address of last residence…………………………………
12. Contact no. of father/mother/family member………………..
13. Whether the child is differently abled: Yes/ No
(i) Hearing Impairment
(ii) Speech Impairment
(iii) Physically disabled
(iv) Mentally disabled
(v) Others (please specify)
14. Family Details:
S.N. Name and Age Sex Education Occupation Income Health History Addictions
Relationship status of
(1) (5) (6)
Mental
(2) (8)
(3) (4) (7) Illness (10)
(9)
15. Relationship among the family members:
i. Father & mother Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
ii. Father & child Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
iii. Mother & child Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
iv. Father & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
v. Mother & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
vi. Child & siblings Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
vii. Child & relative Cordial/ Non cordial/ Not known
16. If child is married, name, age and details of spouse and children…………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
17. History of involvement of family members in offences, if any:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 287
S. Relationship Nature of Legal status Arrest if Period of Punishment
No. Crime of the case any Made Confinement awarded
1. Father
2. Step father
3. Mother
4. Step mother
5. Brother
6. Sister
Others
(uncle/
7.
aunty/
grandparents)
18. Attitude towards religion…………………………………………………………..
19. Present living conditions ………………………………………………………
20. Other factors of importance if any………………………………………..
21. Habits of the child
A B
i) Smoking i) Watching TV/movies
ii) Alcohol consumption ii) Playing indoor/outdoor games
iii) Drug use (specify) iii) Reading books
iv) Gambling iv) Religious activities
v) Begging v) Drawing/painting/acting/singing
vi) Any other vi) Any other
22. Extra-curricular interests……………………………………………………..
23. Outstanding characteristics and personality traits…………………………….
24. The details of education of the child (tick as applicable)
(i). Illiterate
(ii). Studied up to V Standard
(iii). Studied above V Standard but below VIII Standard
(iv). Studied above VIII Standard but below X Standard
(v). Studied above X Standard
25. The details of the school in which studied last(tick as applicable) :
a. Corporation/Municipal/Panchayat
b. Government/SC Welfare School/BC Welfare School
c. Private management
d. School under NCLP

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
288 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
26. Attitude of class mates towards the child………………………………………………
27. Attitude of teachers and classmates towards the child………………………………
28. The reason for leaving School (tick as applicable)
a. Failure in the class last studied
b. Lack of interest in the school activities
c. Indifferent attitude of the teachers
d. Peer group influence
e. To earn and support the family
f. Sudden demise of parents
g. Bullying in school
h. Rigid school atmosphere
i. Absenteeism followed by running away from school
j. There is no appropriate level of school nearby
k. Abuse in school
l. Humiliation in school
m. Corporal punishment
n. Medium of instruction
o. Others (pl. specify)
29. Vocational training, if any……………………………………………………
30. Employment Details, if any……………………………………………………
31. Details of income utilization……………………………………………………
32. Work record (reasons for leaving vocational interests, attitude towards job or employers)………………
33. Majority of the friends are (tick as applicable)
a) Educated
b) Illiterate
c) The same age group
d) Older in age
e) Younger in age
f) Same sex
g) Opposite sex
h) Addicts
i) With criminal background
34. Attitude of the child towards friends………………………………………..
35. Attitude of friends towards the child……………………………………………….
36. observation about neighbourhood (to assess the influence of neighbourhood on the child)………………
37. Mental condition of the child: (Present and past)………………………………….
38. Physical condition of the child: (Present and past)………………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 289
39. Health status of the child
i. Respiratory disorders - present / not known / absent
ii. Hearing impairment - present / not known / absent
iii. Eye diseases- present / not known / absent
iv. Dental disease- present / not known / absent
v. Cardiac diseases- present / not known / absent
vi. Skin disease-present / not known / absent
vii. Sexually transmitted diseases- present / not known / absent
viii. Neurological disorders- present / not known / absent
ix. Mental handicap- present / not known / absent
x. Physical handicap- present / not known / absent
xi. Urinary tract infections –present / not known / absent
xii. Others (pl. specify) -
40. Whether the child has any addiction Yes/ No
41. With whom the child was staying prior to production before the Committee
(i) Parent(s) – Mother / Father / Both
(ii) Siblings / Blood relative
(iii) Guardian(s) – Relationship
(iv) Friends
(v) On the street
(vi) Night shelter
(vii) Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
(viii) Other (pl. specify)
42. History/ tendency of the child to run away from home, if any……………………..
43. Parents attitude towards discipline in the home and child’s reaction…………….
44. Reasons for leaving the family (tick as applicable)
(i) Abuse by parent(s)/guardian(s)/step parents(s)
(ii) In search of employment
(iii) Peer group influence
(iv) Incapacitation of parents
(v) Criminal behaviour of parents
(vi) Separation of Parents
(vii) Demise of parents
(viii) Poverty
(ix) Others (please specify)
45. Whether the child is a victim of any offence Yes/No
46. Types of abuse met by the child (tick as applicable)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
290 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(i) Verbal abuse – parents/siblings/ employers/others (pl. specify)
(ii) Physical abuse
(iii) Sexual abuse parents/siblings/ Employers/others (Pl. specify)
(iv) Others – parents/siblings/ employers/others (pl. Specify)
47. Types of ill-treatment met by the child(tick as applicable).
i) Denial of food – parents/siblings employers/other (pl. specify)
ii) Beaten mercilessly –parents/ Siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
iii) Causing injury –parents/ siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
iv) Detention -parents/ siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
v) Other(please specify)_____________parents/siblings/employers/others(pl. specify)
48. Exploitation faced by the child
i) Extracted work without payment
ii) Little (low) wages with longer duration of work
iii) Others (pl. specify)
49. Whether the child has been bought or sold or procured or trafficked for any purpose
Yes/ No
50. Whether the child has been used for begging Yes/ No
51. Whether the child is used by any gangs or adults or group of adults or has been used for drug peddling:
Yes/ No
52. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any:………………..
53. Details of perpetrator: ( such as Name, Age, Contact number, Address details, Physical Characteristics,
Relationship with the family, middle men involved, is there any other child from the same village who is
abused / harassed / taken / sent by the perpetrator, how the child came in contact with the
perpetrator)………………………..
…………………………………………………………………………………………………
54. Attitude of the child towards the perpetrator…………………………………………..
55. Whether the police have been informed……………………………………………….
56. Action taken, if any against the perpetrator…………………………………………..
57. Any other remark…………………………………………………………….
OBSERVATIONS OF INQUIRY
1. Emotional factors…………………………………
2. Physical condition……………………………………
3. Intelligence………………………………………………
4. Social and economic factors…………………………….
5. Suggestive causes of the problems………………………
6. Analysis of the case, including reasons/contributing factors for the offence…
7. Reasons for child’s need for care and protection………………………..
8. Opinion of experts consulted…………………………………..

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 291
9. Psycho-social expert’s assessment………………….
10. Religious factors………………………………………….
11. Risk analysis for the child to be restored to the family ……………….
12. Previous institutional/case history and individual care plan, if any:………….
13. Recommendation of Child Welfare Officer/Case Worker/Social Worker regarding psychological
support, rehabilitation and reintegration of the child and suggested plan……………………………..
Signature
(Of the Person assigned)
FORM 23
[Rule 19(22)]
APPLICATION FOR SURRENDER OF CHILD
Date ……….
To
Child Welfare Committee,
District……………….
I/ We………………(name of the applicant/s) …………….(relation with the child)
of……………….(name of the child), aged about……….years , intend to surrender…………………..name of
child) before this Child Welfare Committee as……………………………………………………….(reason/s for
surrender).
I/we am /are fully conscious and making this application before this Child Welfare Committee. I
have not been forced or unduly influenced by any one to take this decision of
surrendering……………………. (name of child). I shall have no objection if the child is given in adoption. I
am fully aware of the consequences of surrendering the child.
Full signature of the applicant(s)/
Thumb impression (if the CWC deems appropriate)
Name and address.
…………………………….
(Signature of the Chairperson/ member
Before whom such application is submitted)
Committee member/s present:____________________
Date…………………..
Time……………………
Place…………………..

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
292 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 24
[Rule 19(22)]
DEED OF SURRENDER
Declaration by Person surrendering the child or children
Case No…………..
In Re………………….
I/We, the undersigned………………Family name/First name(s)………residing at, surrender the child
(named)……….Aged………having date of birth…………………for the reason:……………………
(ii) I/we are surrendering my/our child or children on our own and without any coercion, compulsion,
threat, payment, consideration, compensation of any kind;
(iii) I/we have been counselled and informed about the implication that I/we can withdraw our consent
until 60th day of this surrender deed after which my/our consent will be irrevocable and I/we shall
have no claim over the child or children.
(iv) I/we have been made aware of the implications of surrender and are conscious of the fact that after
the 60th day from date of the surrender deed, the legal parent-child relationship between my/our
child or children and me/us will be terminated.
(v) I/we understand that my/our child may be adopted by person(s) residing in India or abroad and
give my/our consent for this purpose.
(vi) I/we understand that the adoption of my/our child will create a permanent parent-child relationship
with the adoptive parent(s) and then cannot claim back the child.
(vii) I/we wish/ do not wish (please tick whichever is applicable) my/our identity and address to be
disclosed to my/our child when he/she returns for root search.
(viii) I/we declare that I/We have read the above statements carefully and have fully understood the
same.
Done at ................ on ..............
[Signature or Thumb Impression of
surrendering person(s)]
2. Declaration by Witnesses
We the undersigned have witnessed the above surrender.
(a) Signature, Name and Address of the first witness
...........................................................................
...........................................................................
(b) Signature, Name and Address of the second witness
..........................................................................
...........................................................................
3. Certification of child welfare committee
We hereby certify that the person and the witness(es) named or identified above appeared before me this
date and signed this document in our presence.
Done at ................ on..............
Signature & Seal of
Members/Chairperson
Child Welfare Committee

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 293
FORM 25
[Rule 19(29)]
CERTIFICATE DECLARING THE CHILD LEGALLY FREE FOR ADOPTION
1. In exercise of the powers vested in the Child Welfare Committee………………….under section 38 of
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, child…………… date of
birth……………placed in the care of the Specialized Adoption Agency/Child Care Institution (name &
address) vide order no…………….dated……………………. of this Committee, is hereby declared legally
free for adoption on the basis of the following:
• Inquiry report of the Probation Officer/ Child Welfare Officer / Social Worker / Case Worker/any
other (as the case may be);
• Deed of surrender executed by the biological parent(s) or the legal guardian of the child before this
Committee on (date);
• Declaration submitted by District Child Protection Unit and the Child Care Institution or Specialized
Adoption Agency concerned to the effect that they have made restoration efforts as required under
Section 40(1) of the Act, the Rules and Adoption Regulations, but, nobody has approached them for
claiming the child as biological parents or legal guardian as on date of the said declaration.
2. This is to certify that:
The biological parent(s) / legal guardian, wherever available, has/have been counselled and duly
informed of the effects of their consent including the placement of the child or children in adoption
which would result in the termination of the legal relationship between the child and his or her family of
origin;
The biological parents / legal guardian have given their consent freely, in the required legal form, and
the consents have not been induced by payment or compensation of any kind and the consent of the
mother (where applicable), has been given only after the birth of the child.
The Specialized Adoption Agency/ Child Care Institution to which the aforesaid child is entrusted shall
post the photograph and other essential details of the child in the CARINGS and shall place such child
in adoption as per the procedure laid down in the Act and Adoption Regulations.
Signature
Chairperson and Members of the Committee
(Seal of the Child Welfare Committee)
Date:
Place:
To: Child Care Institution /Specialized Adoption Agency/ District Child Protection Unit Concerned –
for information and necessary action.
(Signature: & Seal)
Date:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
294 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 26
[Rule 20(1)]
CASE MONITORING SHEET FOR COMMITTEE
CASE MONITORING SHEET
(Separate Sheet may be used in case there are more than one child)
Child Welfare Committee, District………………
Case No. .............................of.............................
Case Name:
Police Station ................................................ Date.........................................................
U/S................................................................... FIR/ GD/ DD No. .......................................
Name of Probation Officer............................... Name of IO ............................................
PARTICULARS OF CHILD
Name Parents/ Guardian with Present address Permanent address
Contact No.
DΑΤΕ ΑΝD ΤΙΜΕ CHILD PRODUCED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE
DATE AND TIME OF FIRST PRODUCTION
DATE OF MEDICAL EXAMINATION UNDER SECTION 54 Cr.P.C. (if any)
ΑGΕ DΕΤΕRΜΙΝΑΤΙΟΝ
Age on the Date of offence
Date of age Determination
Time taken for age determination
Determination by Committee
10. Evidence Relied: Documents Medical
PLACEMENT ΟF ΤΗΕ CHILD
In Children’s Home Sent under supervision
(Name of Institution)
From....................То.........................

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 295
PROGRESS OF ENQUIRY
(Time schedule for disposal of the case to be fixed on the first day of hearing)
Steps to be taken Scheduled Date Actual Date
Age determination Dated……..
Social Investigation Report (Form No.22) Dated………
Submission of Report on Provisions of further investigation, if any Dated……….
Statement of Child Dated…………
Individual Care Plan (In case of child in institutional care Individual Dated………….
Care Plan should be prepared within one month of admittance
Dispositional (Final) Order Dated………..
Post Dispositional Review Dated…………
Signed by
Child Welfare Committee
FORM 27
[Rule 21(2) and 22 (2)]
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION OF CHILD CARE INSTITUTION UNDER THE JUVENILE JUSTICE
(CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN) ACT, 2015
1. Detail of Applicant/ Institution which proposes to run the Child Care Institution:
(i) Type of Institution ………………………………….
(ii) Name of the Institution / Organization………………………
(iii) Registration number and date of Registration of the Institution/ Organization under the relevant Act
(Annex- Relevant documents of registration and bye-laws, memorandum of
association)…………………………………………
(iv) Period of validity to run the Institution / Organization……………………….
(v) Complete address of the Applicant/ Institution/ organization…………………
(vi) STD code/ Telephone No…………………………………………………………
(vii) STD code/ Fax No……………………………………………………………………
(viii) E-mail address……………………………………………………………..
(ix) Whether the organization is of all India character, if yes, give address of its branches, in other
states…………………………………..
(x) Whether the Institution/ Organization had been denied registration earlier
Yes/No
(xi) Ref. No. of application which resulted in denial of registration as CCI
a) Date of denial........................
b) Which department has denied the registration.............
(xii) Reason for denial of registration as CCI..................................................
2. Details of the proposed Child Care Institution
(i) Name of the proposed Child Care Institution……………………….
(ii) Type/Kind of Child Care Institution………………………..
(iii) Complete address/ location of proposed child Care Institution or organization
(iv) STD code/ Telephone No…………………………….
(v) STD code /Fax No………………………….
(vi) E-mail address…………………………..

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
296 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
3. Connectivity (Name and Distance from the proposed Child Care Institution):
(i) Main Road……………………
(ii) Bus –stand………………….
(iii) Railway Station………………..
(iv) Any landmark…………….
4. Infrastructure
(i) No. of Rooms (Mention with measurement)………………
(ii) No. of toilets (mention with measurement)……………….
(iii) No. of Kitchen (mention with measurement) …………………..
(iv) No. of sick room………………………….
(v) Annex -Copy of blue print of the building (authentic sketch plan of building)…
(vi) Arrangement to deal with unforeseen disaster also mention the kind of arrangement made:
(i) Fire
(ii) Earthquake
(iii) Any other arrangement
(iv) Arrangement of Drinking water
(v) Arrangement to maintain sanitation and hygiene:
(vi) Pest Control
(vii) Waste disposal
(viii) Storage area
(ix) Any other arrangement
(x) Rent agreement/ building maintenance estimate (whichever is applicable)(Annex- copy of
Rent agreement)
5. Capacity of the Institution/ Organization
i. No. of children (0-6 years) present in the home , (if any)
ii. No. of children (6-10 years) present in the home , (if any)
iii. No. of children (11-15 years) present in the home , (if any)
iv. No. of children (16-18 years) present in the home , (if any)
v. No. of persons (18-21 years) present in the home , (if any)
6. Whether the Child Welfare Committee/Juvenile Justice Board has been informed about the children being
housed in the Institution Yes/ No
7. Facilities Available
(i) Education facility…………………………
(ii) Health Checkup arrangement, frequency of checkup, type of checkups proposed to be
done……………………
(iii) Any other facility that shall impact on the overall development of the child
8. Staffing
(i) Detailed staff list…………………………………………………
(ii) Education and Experience of the staff ………………………………
(iii) Name of partner organizations
(iv) Name of the chief functionary of the organization
9. Background of the Applicant (Institution / Organization)
(i) Major activities of the organization in last two years
a. (Annex copy of Annual Report)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 297
(ii) An updated list of members of the management committee/ governing body in the enclosed
format (Annex- resolution of the annual meeting)
(iii) List of assets/ infrastructure of the organization
(iv) If the organization registered under the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (Annex –
certificate of registration)
(v) Details of foreign contribution received during the last two years (Annex- relevant documents)
(vi) List of other sources of grant- in – aid funding (if any )with the name of the scheme / project ,
purpose amount, etc. (separately)
(vii) Details of existing bank account of the agency indicating branch code account no.
(viii) Whether the agency agree to open a separate bank account for the grant proposed
(ix) Annex -Photocopy of Accounts of last three years:
i. Auditors report
ii. Income and
expenditure
account
iii. Receipt and
payment account
iv. Balance sheet of
the organization.
I have read and understood The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016.
I declare that no person associated with the organization has been previously convicted or has
been involved in any immoral act or in any act of child abuse or employment of child labour and that the
organization has not been blacklisted by the Central or the State Government at any point of time.
………………………….(Name of the Organization / Institution) has complied with all the
requirements to be granted registration as a Child Care Institution under the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016.
I undertake to abide by all the conditions laid down by the Central/ State Act, Rules, Guidelines and
Notifications in this regard.
Signature of the authorized signatory: ……………………………..
Name:………………………………………..
Designation:…………………………
Address…………………………………..
District………………………………………
Date……………………..
Office stamp:
Signature of:
Witness no.1: …………………………………
Witness no.2: ………………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
298 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 28
[Rule 21(3) and 22 (4)]
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
(UNDER SECTION 41 THE JJ ACT)
After perusal of the documents submitted as per Form 27 is granted registration No………….as a
Child Care Institution under Section 41(1) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015 with effect from….. for a period of ….years.
The Institution which has the capacity of…………. Children shall remain bound to follow the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Rules, 2016 and regulations framed by the Central/ State Government from time to time.
Dated this …………….. day of …………….. 20 ……………………
(Signature)
Seal
Name and Designation ……………………………………
FORM 29
[Rule 22(9)]
MONTHLY REPORT SUBMITTED BY OPEN SHELTER TO DCPU
1. Name of the Open Shelter…………………
2. Name of the In charge ……………………
3. Registration No………………………….
4. Address of the Home……………………..
5. Period of the Report…………………………..
6. Details of children available on
Sr. Name Father’s Address Date of Reason Duration Facilities Produced Remarks,
No of the name of the admission for of stay availed before if any
child Child, if admission CWC
available (Yes /
No)
7. Total number of children admitted during the month…………………………
8. Total number of children in the Open Shelter on the last day of the month…….
9. Total number of children who availed the facilities of the Open Shelter during the
month………………………………………………………….
10. Out of these the number of children who availed the services only during the day in the month:
Signature
In charge of the Open Shelter Home

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 299
FORM 30
[Rule 23(9)]
HOME STUDY REPORT FOR PROSPECTIVE FOSTER PARENTS
DATE OF REGISTRATION -
AADHAR CARD NO of PFP : -
NAME OF THE SOCIAL WORKER -
DATE OF HOME VISIT -
Part-I of the format shall be filled up by the prospective Foster parents and Part-II of the template shall be
filled up by the Social Worker to submit an assessment report along with his/her observation about
suitability of the prospective adoptive/ foster parents.
PART-I : SELF ASSESSMENT
A. Information about the prospective foster parents and their family background
Particulars of the foster parents
Full Name
Date of birth & age
Place of birth
Complete Address with e-mail ID (Present & Permanent Address)
Identity Proof
Religion
Language(s)
Date of Marriage
Present Educational Qualification
Employment/occupation
Name & Address of the present Employer/Business concern
Annual Income
Health Status

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
300 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
B. Family background information:
(1) Give a short description of social status and background of the prospective foster parents along
with the following information.
Details about Parents of the Applicants
Father Mother
Name in full
Age
Nationality/Citizenship
Occupation
Previous occupation
Presently residing with
(2) Please complete the following table with the names of each of your respective children (adopted
and biological), their sex, educational status (kindergarten, elementary, etc.) and dates of birth.
Name of the Child Sex Date of Birth Educational Status
(3) If there are other members residing, please furnish the following information in respect of them.
Name Nature of Age Gender Occupation
Relationship
(4) Please describe how you believe the foster care would affect the family members (grand parents,
children, relatives and others).

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 301
C. Professional/Employment Details (Professional career details for last 5 years):
Foster Father
Organisation Employer Details Job Title From To
(Name & Address)
Foster Mother
Organisation Employer Details Job Title From To
(Name & Address)
D Financial Position: (Give a short description of your income from all sources such as savings,
investments, expenditures and liabilities and debts along with supporting
documents)……………………………………………………………….
E Description of Home and Neighbourhood: (Describe the accommodation details and
neighbourhood relationship)
(1) How many rooms do you have in your home and describe the play area available
for the child.................................
(2) Please describe the neighbourhood in which you reside, including any aspect that
you believe makes it child-friendly……………………
F. Attitude and Motivation for foster care:
(1) Please circle the term which best describes the reason why you wish to take a child in foster
care, you may circle more than one option, if applicable:
a) Provide a companion to your other children;
b) Provide a child with a happy home;
c) Other, please specify ……………………………….
(2) Please circle the statement which describes how you think the foster care arrangement will
improve the lives of your other children, you may circle more than one, if applicable:
a) They will be less lonely;
b) They will learn to be more accommodating:
c) They will become more empathetic;
d) Not applicable as I have no other children;
e) Other, please specify ______________________________________
G. Attitude of grandparents/extended family members, other relatives and significant others
towards the foster care: (Give a short description about the opinion of other important persons towards
foster care who would have impact in the child rearing process)……………………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
302 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
H. Anticipated Plans of the prospective foster parents for the child and rearing in the Family:
(1) Please describe how you will manage caring for the child and other life commitments such as
work.
(2) Who will be responsible for caring for the child when you are at work, or absent from the familial
home (domestic help, grandparents, spouse).
(3) Please describe your disciplinary approach to parenting.
(4) In case the foster child demonstrates adjustment difficulties, please describe the steps that you
plan to take to ease his/her transition into the family?
(5) Would you be prepared to utilize family counselling if the child continues to have difficulties
adjusting?
a) Yes
b) No
(6) Would you be willing to support financially higher professional studies of the foster child
a) Yes
b) No
I. Preparation and Training: (Give details about the counselling sessions the prospective foster
parent(s) have undergone on foster care, child care, handling of needs of children, etc. and their
capacity, training and/or experiences in parenting children with their special need, if any)
J. Health Status (Emotional and Physical): (Give details of the state of emotional and physical
health status of the applicant(s), if any. If a family member suffers from a particular disease, condition or
syndrome, describe how the family copes with it and how this might affect any proposed foster care.)
(1) Do you or your spouse suffer from any medical condition? If so, would you please provide details?
(2) Are you or your spouse currently being treated by a psychologist or psychiatrist?
(3) Are you currently taking any prescribed medication?
(4) Are there currently any child/ren in your house being treated for a medical condition?
(5) Does your family have health and hospitalization insurance coverage for all family
members?
Signature of the Prospective Foster Parents
Date
PART-II: ASSESSMENT REPORT OF THE SOCIAL WORKER
(To be used by the Social Worker to prepare the assessment report)
(The information/facts filled in the template shall be kept confidential by the agencies /authorities.)
1. Factual Assessment
(i) Have you verified the contents of the facts mentioned in Part I of the template?
Yes/No
(ii) Are you satisfied about the facts mentioned in the documents vis-à-vis observation during
interviews and visits?
Yes/No

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 303
2. Psychosocial Assessment:
2.1 Interaction with the prospective foster parents
(i) Have you interacted with the prospective foster parents individually and jointly?
(ii) Are the prospective foster parents well prepared for fostering the child?
2.2 Home visit findings
(i) When did you visit the home of the prospective foster parents? Who were the members present
during your visit?
(ii) Whom did you interact during the home visit?
(iii) Have you met any neighbour/relative? Give a detailed description about the interaction?
(iv) Whether the home environment is conducive for the child?
(v) Are the prospective foster parents well prepared for foster care?
(vi) Did the prospective foster parents have any doubt about parenting issues or any other issues?
Have you cleared their doubts?
2.3 Interaction with the family members
(i) Have you interacted with other family members of the prospective foster parents? What is their
opinion about the proposed foster care? Are they positive about the foster care arrangement?
(ii) Are there any other family member(s) whom you could not interact but they might have a larger
role in the proposed foster care? If so, how did you interact? Would you plan to take their views?
(iii) Have you interacted with older child/ren present in the home of the prospective foster parents? If
yes, please give details.
(iv) Have you noticed any adverse remarks from the family members? If so, how far those remarks
may have an impact on the foster care process?
2.4 Financial capacity
(i) What is your opinion about the financial status of the prospective foster parents? Are they
financially sound to welcome another member into their family?
(ii) Have you observed any financial situation which is hidden in the template?
(iii) Would you recommend any financial assistance to them?
2.5 Physical and emotional capacity
(i) Are the prospective foster parents in a good physical and emotional state to take care of a child?
(ii) Have you observed any physical or psychological issues with the prospective foster parents or
any other family members that is going to affect the life of the upcoming child? If so, give details.
(iii) Are the prospective foster parents emotionally equipped enough to take care of a child?
3. Recommendation for Foster care
3.1 Do you recommend the prospective foster parents for foster care? Put your views and rationale
for recommending the prospective foster parents for foster care.
3.2 In case, you do not recommend the prospective foster parents for foster care, cite appropriate
reasons for taking such decision.
Signature, name, designation and official seal

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
304 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 31
[Rule 23(4)]
CHILD STUDY REPORT
CHILD STUDY REPORT
S. No. Item Response
Date of Assessment
1
Source of Referral
2
Photograph of the Child to be refreshed
periodically
3
Profile of the Child
4 Name of the Child
5 Date of Birth
6 Place of Birth
7 Age
8 Nationality
9 Religion
10 Education
11 Mother Tongue
12 Present Address
13 Aadhaar Card Number
Contact Details
14 a) Landline
b) Mobile

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 305
15 Placement history if the child is from institution The child has not been placed in adoption
a) Date of Placement
b) Name and Permanent details of the
child
c) Reason for leaving the family
16 Reason for placement if the child is from
community
Mother or both parents in prison
Parents are suffering from long term
illness
Dysfunctional family(eg substance abuse,
domestic violence etc)
Parents in process of separation
Parents in process of legal custody dispute
Natural disaster
Others
I ………………… Social Worker hereby certify that the information given in this form about child
…………………………is correct.
Signature:
Place : Name:
Date : Designation:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
306 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 32
[Rule 23(15)]
ORDER OF FOSTER CARE PLACEMENT WITH A FAMILY
OR
GROUP FOSTER CARE
The child (name and address) …………………approximate age……… d/o or s/o
Mr………………… and Mrs…………………….is in need of care and protection of a family.
Mr………………… and Mrs……………resident of (complete address and contact numbers)
……………………………………………are declared fit for foster-care placement of the child after
considering the Individual Care Plan, Child Study Report and Home Study Report.
OR
Child Care Institution (Name and address)…………………………is declared fit for foster-care
placement of the child after considering the Individual Care Plan and Child Study Report.
The child (name) …………………………….. is placed in foster care for a period of
……………………………… under the supervision of the aforesaid Child Welfare Officer/Social Worker
(name and contact) …………………………………………………….
Chairperson/ Member
Child Welfare Committee
FORM 33
[Rule 23(16)]
UNDERTAKING BY THE FOSTER FAMILY/GROUP FOSTER CARE ORGANISATION
I/We …………………resident(s) of House no. ………Street ……………….. Village/Town
……………District …………State ………/ care giver associated with foster care home run by ----------
-----------organization at …………(address), do hereby declare that I/We am/are willing to take charge of
(name of the child …………………………… Aged………under the orders of the Child Welfare
Committee………………………subject to the following terms and conditions:
i. If the conduct of the child is unsatisfactory I/we shall at once inform the Committee
ii. I/We shall do my/our best for the welfare and education of the said child as long as he remains in
my charge and shall make proper provision for his maintenance.
iii. In the event of his illness, he shall have proper medical attention in the nearest hospital and a report
of it followed by a fitness certificate shall be submitted before the Committee.
iv. I/We shall inform the Committee about any change of address.
v. I/We shall do my best to ensure that the child will not be subjected to any form of abuse.
vi. I/We agree to adhere to the conditions laid by the Committee.
vii. I/We undertake to produce him before the Committee as and when required.
viii. I/We undertake to inform the Committee immediately if the child goes out of my charge or control.
Date this ………………day of ………………..
Signature and address of 2 witnesses Signature of Applicant(s)
(Signed before me)
Chairperson/Member, Child Welfare Committee

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 307
FORM 34
[Rule 23(17)]
RECORD OF A CHILD IN FOSTER CARE
a) Case no.........
b) Name of the Child……………………….
c) Age……………………………………..
d) Gender……………………………………………
e) Name and address of the Child Care Institution, if any from where the child has been given for foster
care……………………………………….
f) Individual Care Plan
g) Any other source of referral………………………..
h) Details of the child placed in foster care including Photograph of the child, foster care giver/parent,
biological parents, if available………………………..
i) Details of the placement - individual or group including date and period of placement
j) Home Study Report of the biological family, where applicable with photograph
k) Home Study report of the foster family- individual or group care, with photograph
l) Child Study Report
m) Address of the Child Welfare Committee
n) Particulars of the order of the Committee placing the child in foster care
o) Record (number and significant details) of each visit with the child, foster family, Biological family, if
available and child’s school
p) Record of all reviews of the placement including observations, extent and quality of compliance with
Care Plan, child’s developmental milestones, child’s academic progress, and any changes in family
environment
q) In the case of extension or termination of the placement, record of date and reason for termination
r) Date of the child being handed over to the foster family:
s) Financial assistance provided, if any
t) Name of the Case Worker appointed

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
308 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 35
[Rule 23(18)]
MONTHLY INSPECTION OF FOSTER FAMILIES/GROUP FOSTER CARE
(Fill as applicable)
Date of Visit:
a) Name :
b) Date of Birth & Age :
c) Gender (Affix Recent
d) Date of Placement Photo)
1. Details of Foster Parents
a) Name of Foster Parents
b) Address
c) Contact details
i) Landline
ii) Mobile:
d) Aadhaar Card Number:
e) Photograph of Parents
(Affix recent photo) (Affix recent photo)
3. Interaction with the Foster Child
a) Child’s experience being part of the family (
with reference to whether the child is
properly cared for – physical, emotional and
Happy and well-adjusted
health) describe
In process of adjusting
i) Health Indicators
maladjusted
a) Present Health Status
b) Any record of Illness
c) Any other treatment that the child
is undergoing
ii) Emotional
b) How is the child performing in his studies?
(i) check in relation with the grades/marks
Yes No
the child achieved in previous
examinations,
Sometimes
(ii) Foster parents have regular

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 309
conversations with the child regarding Yes No
his/her studies, extra curriculal activities
(iii) Do they attend PTA meetings? Sometimes
c) i) The amount of time parents (foster)
spend with the child either alone or
together with their own children.
Having conversations
ii) How do they spend time together as a
Dining
family and for what?
Playing
Watching TV
iii) Does the foster child share with the
foster parent’s problems he /she is facing Going to school
either at home, school in the
Doing homework together
neighbourhood or emotionally feeling not
Others (specify)
happy?
Yes No
Sometimes
d) Does the child get support from foster Yes No
parents’ children? ( do they mutually help Sometimes
each other)
e) Has there been any incident that made the
foster child feel discriminated against?
f) Has there been any incident/incidents that
made you uncomfortable?
Yes No
i) The way a foster parent/older sibling/any
Yes No
other member touched you.
ii)The conversations foster parents/older Yes No
siblings/any other member had with you
Yes No
iii) Any materials- visuals, printed you were
made to watch or read
iv) Were you at any time sexually
assaulted or abused?*
*if the answers are “yes” immediate steps
should be taken to remove the child and
send to a place of safety and support the
child with medical and psycho-social
therapy.
** Actions to be taken against the foster
carers or parents according to the
procedures laid down.
*** Is similar treatment being meted out to
their biological child also? Then the
biological child should also be treated as a
child in need of care and protection and
appropriate action may be taken.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
310 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
g) Whether the child keeps in contact with Yes No
his/her family of origin (by telephone,
letters, visits). Specify
h) Have you been beaten by the foster parent Yes No
at any time?
i) Have you been spoken to in a manner Yes No
that you felt humiliated?
j) Are you made to do household chores? Yes No
k) Do the biological children of the foster
parents made to do the same household
Yes No
chores?
5.Interaction with Foster Parents
a) Parent’s impressions about the behavior (emotional Happy and well-
well-being) of the child in the family adjusted
In process of adjusting
Maladjusted
b) Perception about his/her adjustment with the Happy and well-
household and with other members in the family adjusted
In process of adjusting
Maladjusted
c) How do you discipline the child? Reason with the child
Scolding , Chastise
Beat the child
Other Methods
(Specify)
d) What are the behavior traits that are of concern and Lack of co-operation
how do you as parents deal with them?
Lack of Adjustment
Introvert
Aggressive

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 311
Not Communicative
Any Other
e) Do you spend time together with the foster child and Yes No
biological children? Describe.
Sometimes
f) Views on the progress of Child’s education and other
talents
Yes No
i)Child is faring well in school
Yes No
ii) If the child is not faring well in school do you seek to
Yes No
find out the reasons a)from the child
Sometimes
b) the school teacher
iii) Do you attend PTA meetings?
g) Do the foster parents consult the child while taking Yes No
decisions on behalf of him/her?
Sometimes
h) How does the child show his approval/disapproval to Accept the
the foster parent’s decisions?
decision with happiness
Accept the decisions
but unhappy
Refuse to accept the
decision and shows
aggressive behavior)
i) Are the foster parents aware of the social networks of Yes No
the child?
j) Views on child’s social relationship with the neighbors, Good and regular
school friends and teachers. interaction
Periodic Interactions
k) What is their plan for the child?(To be noted down)
l) Does the foster child maintain the contact with his/her Yes No
family of origin? (by telephone, letters, visits). Specify
Sometimes
m) Who maintains the bank account of the foster child as
a parent?

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
312 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
6. Interaction with biological children of the Foster Parents:
a) The things they do together with the foster child Dining
Playing
Watching TV
Going to school
Doing homework
together
b) Do they have quarrels or fights between themselves and Yes No
the foster child? If yes, how often, on what issues, and how
Sometimes
do they resolve it. Please note down.
c) How do you feel when your parents show love, affection Happy
and care to the foster child?
Unhappy
Angry
Jealous
7. Interaction with the School Teachers:
a) Information about the academic performance of the child Good
in the school (verify with progress cards to see if the child
has shown any progress)
Fair
Satisfactory
Poor
b) Teacher’s observation: if the child has adjusted to his/her Happy and well-
foster parents adjusted
In process of
adjusting
Maladjusted
c) Do the foster parents attend parent-teacher meetings? Yes No
Sometimes
d) Do they seem interested in the child’s studies?(by Yes No
enquiring of his academic achievements, his relationship
Indifferent
with teachers and classmates)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 313
e) Observation on child’s behavior in the school ( his Happy and well-
relationship with teachers, classmates) adjusted
In process of
adjusting
Maladjusted
f) Any concerns of the child in the school. If yes, give details
8. Interaction with Parents of Origin
a) Have the parents of origin maintained contact with their child Yes No
(by telephone calls, letters, and visits? How frequently?
Sometimes
b) Was the child happy to meet them? Yes No
Upset while meeting
them
c) Did the child raise any issues with regard to his or her foster Yes No
carers/parents/family with them?
d) Do they have any interaction with the foster family regarding Yes No
the wellbeing of the child?
Sometimes
e) The family’s status to receive back the child Family is interested
and in a position to
receive back the
child.
Family is interested
but not in a position
to receive back the
child.
Family is not
interested to receive
back the child.
Received any support from the government or any other
agency in helping them to receive back the child from the
f) Yes No
foster carers(If yes, give details)
9. Interaction with Neighbours
a) Knowledge about the neighbor fostering a child. Yes No
b) Information about the attitude and behavior of the foster family Positive and Happy
towards the child.
Indifferent Attitude

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
314 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Negative Attitude
Misbehavior towards
foster children
c) Observed any quarrel or issues between the family members
and foster child or between neighborhood and the foster child (
Yes No
if yes, give detail)
Prepared by
Signatures
FORM 36
[Rule 24(5)]
ORDER OF SPONSORSHIP PLACEMENT
The child (name and address) …………………..age…………… d/o or s/o Mr……………………
and/or Mrs………………. has been identified as a child needing sponsorship support for education/ health/
nutrition/ other developmental needs ……………………(please specify). The District Child Protection Unit is
hereby directed to release Rs……………per month/ Rs…………. as one time sponsorship support to the
said child for a period of …………… (days/month) and carryout necessary follow up and for the said
purpose shall open a bank account in the name of the child……………….. to be operated by
……………………..
Children’s Court/ Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board/
Chairperson/Member, Child Welfare Committee
FORM 37
[Rule 25(2)]
ORDER OF AFTER CARE PLACEMENT
The child (name) ………………. d/o or s/o ………………… has/ will be completing 18 years of age on (date)
…………………. She/ he is still in need of care and protection for the purpose of rehabilitation and
reintegration and specifically for …….. (specify the purpose). She/he is placed in (name of organization)
……………. for providing aftercare. The In-charge of the Organization is directed to admit the child and
provide all possible opportunities for her/ his rehabilitation and reintegration in its truest sense. The person
shall be provided all these opportunities maximum till the age of 21 years only or till reintegration in the
society, whichever is earlier. The in-charge will send half yearly report on the status of the child/youth to the
Child Welfare Committee.
The State/ District Child Protection Unit is hereby directed to release Rs…………per month towards after-
care support to the said person for a period of …………. (days/month) and carryout necessary follow up and
for the said purpose shall open a bank account in the name of the person………………..
Children’s Court/ Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board/
Chairperson/Member, Child Welfare Committee
Copy to: State/ District Child Protection Unit or concerned Department of the State Government.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 315
FORM 38
[Rule 27(2)]
APPLICATION FOR FIT FACILITY INCLUDING GROUP FOSTER CARE
1. Detail of Institution/ Agency/ Organization which seeks recognition as fit facility
1.a Name of the Institution /Agency/ Organization
1.b Registration number and date of Registration of the Institution/
Organization under the relevant Act
(Annex- Relevant documents of registration, bye-laws,
memorandum of association)
1. c Complete address of the Applicant/ Institution/ organization
1.d STD code/ Telephone No.
1.e STD code Fax No.
1.f E-mail address
1.g Whether the organization is of all India character, if yes, give address
of its branches, in other states
1.h If the Institution had been denied recognition earlier? If yes
i. Reference No. of application leading to denial of recognition
ii. Date of denial
iii. Who had denied the recognition
iv. Reason for denial of recognition
2. Details of the proposed fit facility:
2.a Complete address/ location of proposed Fit Facility
2.b STD code/ telephone no
2.c STD code fax no
2.d E-mail
3. Connectivity (Name and Distance from the proposed Fit Facility):
3.a Main Road
3.b Bus –stand
3.c Railway Station
3.d Any landmark
4. Infrastructure:
4.a No. of Rooms (Mention with measurement)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
316 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
4.b No. of toilets (mention with measurement)
4.c No. of Kitchens (mention with measurement)
4.d No. of sick room
4.e Annex -Copy of blue print of the building (authentic sketch
plan of building)
4.f Arrangement to deal with unforeseen disaster also mention the
kind of arrangement made:
i) Fire
ii) Earth quake
iii) Any other arrangement
4.g Arrangement of Drinking water Annex-Certified from public
health engineering (PHE) Department.
4.h Arrangement to maintain sanitation and hygiene:
i. Pest Control
ii. Waste disposal
iii. Storage area
iv. Any other arrangement
4.i Rent agreement/ building maintenance estimate (whichever is
applicable)(Annex- copy of Rent agreement)
5. Capacity of the Fit Facility
6. Facilities Available (would depend on the purpose for which recognition as fit facility is
to be given)
6.c Any other facility that shall impact on the overall development of
the child
7. Staffing
7.a Detailed staff list
7.b Name of partner organizations
8. Background of the Applicant
8.a Major activities of the organization in last two years
8.b An updated list of members of the management committee/
governing body in the enclosed format (Annex- resolution of the
annual meeting)
8.c List of assets/ infrastructure of the organization
8.d If the organization is registered under the Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Act, 1976 (Annex – certificate of registration)
8.e Details of foreign contribution received last two years (Annex-
relevant documents)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 317
8.f List of other sources of grant- in – aid funding (if any )with the
name of the scheme / project , purpose amount, etc. (separately)
8.g Details of existing bank account of the agency indicating branch
code account no.
8.h Whether the agency agrees to open a separate bank account for
the grant proposed
8.i Annex -Photocopy of Accounts of last three years:
i. Auditors report
ii. Income and
expenditure account
iii. Receipt and payment
account
iv. Balance sheet of the
organization.
I have read and understood The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children Act), 2015; and
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016.
………………………………..(Name of the Organization / Institution) has complied with all the
requirements to be granted recognition as a Fit Facility under the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015 and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016.
I declare that no person associated with the organization has been previously convicted or has
been involved in any immoral act or in any act of child abuse or employment of child labour or an offence
involving moral turpitude and that the organization has not been blacklisted by the Central or the State
Government at any point of time.
I undertake to abide by all the conditions laid down by the Central/ State Act, Rules, Guidelines and
Notifications in this regard.
I undertake to abide by the orders passed by the Juvenile Justice Board or the Child Welfare
Committee from time to time.
Signature of the authorized signatory: ……………………………
Name:
Designation:
Address:
District:
Date:
Office stamp:
Signature of:
Witness no.1: …………………………….
Witness no.2: ………………………………

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
318 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 39
[Rule 27(4)]
CERTIFICATE OF RECOGNITION OF FIT FACILITY INCLUDING GROUP FOSTER CARE
After perusal of the documents and on the basis of an inspection of the Institution conducted
on……. the........................ (Name of the Institution) is recognized as a Fit Facility under Section 51 of
the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 with effect from….. for a period of
…..years.
The Facility shall remain bound to follow the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015, the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2016 and regulations framed
by the appropriate Government from time to time.
The Facility shall remain bound to comply with the orders passed by the Juvenile Justice
Board or the Child Welfare Committee from time to time.
Dated this……………………day of ……………………20 …………………….
(Signature)
(Seal)
Dated this ……………….day of …………………20…………………………
(Signature)
Chairperson, Child Welfare Committee / Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board
FORM 40
[Rule 61(3)(xii)]
LIST OF CHILDREN SUBMITTED BY CCI TO BOARD OR COMMITTEE WEEKLY
Details of the Child Care Institution:
Sr. No. Name of Child FIR/DD/Case No. PS Date of Next
Production
Total Number of Children admitted during the week……………………………………...
Total Number of Children released during the week……………………………………
Total Number of Children in the Institution as on………………………………………
Signature
Person-in-charge of the CCI
Date:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 319
FORM 41
[Rule 69 (C) (1)]
PROTECTIVE CUSTODY CARD
1. Name of the child :
2. Age of the child :
3. Mother’s Name :
4. Father’s Name :
5. Address of parent/guardians :
6. Date of receiving by Organization/Institution:
7. Name & contact details of the person producing child:
8. Date of Inquiry:
This is to authorize and direct you to receive the above named child in your Child Care Institution
and keep her/him in your charge for protective custody under the J.J. Act, 2015.
And to produce the child on …...
Next Date of hearing……………..
(Signature)
Principal Magistrate/ Member,
Juvenile Justice Board
FORM 42
[Rules 69 (D) (4)]
OVERNIGHT PROTECTIVE STAY
Whereas (name of the child) ..................................has this day been apprehended/ found to be in
need of overnight protective stay at the ………………………………………………. (Name of the Institution).
The said child has been produced by …………………… ( Name of the child welfare police officer,
from ………………Police station , ……………) . The child has been brought along with the required
application seeking protective stay, medical report stating the general health condition of the child which has
been duly perused by the person in-charge of the Institution.
The said child has been brought to the Institution at ………………. (time) and shall be handed over
on the following day to the concerned jurisdiction of the child welfare police officer on or before
………………(mention time).
The personal belongings of the child have been thoroughly searched and the following articles
……………………………………………. (if any) have been handed over to the concerned child welfare
police officer.
In case the concerned child welfare police officer fails to report in due time to take custody of the
child, such child shall be produced before the Juvenile Justice Board/ Child Welfare Committee by the
Officer in charge of the Institution at the earliest.
Copy to:
1. Child Welfare Police Officer
2. Board / Committee
3. The Person in charge of the Institution
Dated this ___________________ day of _____________________ 20
(Signature) (Signature)
The Person-in-charge of the Institution Child Welfare Police Officer

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
320 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
FORM 43
[Rule 69 (H) (3)]
CASE HISTORY OF THE CHILD
(FOR CHILD CARE INSTITUTION)
Case/Profile No………………….
Affix a latest
photograph here
Date & Time……………………….
A. PERSONAL DATA
1. Name…………………………………………………………………………………
2. Male / Female (tick the appropriate category) …………………………………..
3. Age at the time of admission………………………………………………………..
4. Present age…………………………………
5. Category (tick as applicable):
(i) Separated from family
(ii) Abandoned/deserted
(iii) Victim of exploitation and violence (give detail)
(iv) Run-away
(v) Any other
6. Religion
(i) Hindu (OC/BC/SC/ST)
(ii) Muslim/Christian/Other(pl. specify)
7. Native District & State:
8. Description of the Housing:
(i) Concrete building/ Kuchha
(ii) Three bedroom/ two bedroom/ one bedroom/ no separate bedroom
(iii) Owned / rental
9. By whom the child was brought before the Child Welfare Committee/Juvenile Justice
Board (tick as applicable):
i. Police-Local Police/Special Juvenile Police Unit/ designated Child Welfare Police Officer /
Railway Police/ Women Police
ii. Probation Officers

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 321
iii. Social Welfare Organization
iv. Social Worker
v. Parent(s)/Guardian (s) (please Specify the relationship)
vi. Any public servant
vii. Any public spirited citizen
viii. Child himself/herself
10. Reasons for leaving the family
i. Abuse by parent(s)/guardian(s)/step parents(s)
ii. In search of employment
iii. Peer group influence
iv. Incapacitation of Parents
v. Criminal behaviour of Parents
vi. Separation of Parents
vii. Demise of Parents
viii. Poverty
ix. Others (please specify)
11. Types of abuse met by the child
i. Verbal abuse – parents/siblings/ employers/others (pl. specify)
ii. Physical abuse
iii. Sexual abuse parents/siblings/ Employers/others(Pl. specify)
iv. Others – parents/siblings/ employers/others (pl. Specify)
12. Types of ill-treatment met by the child.
i) Denial of food –parents/siblings employers/other (pl. specify)
ii) Beaten mercilessly-parents/ Siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
iii) Causing injury – parents/ siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
iv) Detention - parents/ siblings/employers/other (pl. specify)
v) Other (please Specify)
13. Exploitation faced by the child
i) Extracted work without payment
ii) Little (low) wages with longer duration of work
iii) Others (pl. specify)
14. Health status of the child before admission.
i) Respiratory disorders - present / not known / absent
ii) Hearing impairment - present / not known / absent

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
322 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
iii) Eye diseases - present / not known / absent
iv) Dental disease - present / not known / absent
v) Cardiac diseases - present / not known / absent
vi) Skin disease - present / not known / absent
vii) Sexually transmitted diseases - present / not known / absent
viii) Neurological disorders - present / not known / absent
ix) Mental handicap - present / not known / absent
x) Physical handicap - present / not known / absent
xi) Urinary tract infections - present / not known / absent
- present / not known / absent
xii) Others (pl. specify)
15. With whom the child was staying prior to admission
i. Parent(s) – Mother / Father / Both
ii. Siblings / Blood relative
iii. Guardian(s) – Relationship
iv. Friends
v. On the street
vi. Night shelter
vii. Orphanages / Hostels/ Similar Homes
viii. Other (pl. specify)
16. Visit of the parents to meet the child
Prior to institutionalization- Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / Never
After institutionalization - Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / Never
17. Visit of the Child to his parents
Prior to institutionalization - Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During
summer holidays / Whenever fallen sick / Never
After institutionalization-- Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During summer
holidays / Whenever fallen sick / Never
18. Correspondence with parents -
Prior to institutionalization – Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During
summer holidays / Whenever fallen sick / Never
After institutionalization – Frequently / Occasionally / Rarely / During festival times / During summer
holidays / Whenever fallen sick / Never
19. Details of disability
20 Type Family: Family / joint family/ broken family / single parent

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 323
21. Relationship among the family members:
i) Father & mother Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
ii) Father & child Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
iii) Mother & child Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
iv) Father & siblings Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
v) Mother & siblings Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
vi) Child & siblings Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
vii) Child & relative Cordial/ Non-cordial/ Not known
22. History of crime committed by family members, if any:
S. Relationship Nature Legal status Arrest if Period of Punishment
No. of Crime of the case any confinement Awarded
Made
1. Father
2. Step father
3. Mother
4. Step mother
5. Brother
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
6. Sister
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
7. Child
8. Others
(uncle/
aunty/
grandparents)
23. Properties owned by the family:
i. Landed properties (pl. specify the area)
ii. Household articles- Cows/ Cattle/ Bull

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
324 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
iii. Vehicles- two wheeler/ three wheeler/ four wheeler (lorry/
bus/ car/ tractor/ jeep)
iv. Others (please specify)
24. Marriage details of family members:
i) Parents Arranged/ Special Marriage
ii) Brothers Arranged/ Special Marriage
iii) Sisters Arranged/ Special Marriage
25. Social activities of family members:
i. Participate in social and religious functions
ii. Participate in cultural activities
iii. Does not participate in social and religious functions
iv. Not known
26. Parental care towards child before admission:
i. Over protection
ii. Affectionate
iii. Attentive
iv. Not affectionate
v. Not attentive
vi. Rejection
ADOLESCENCE HISTORY (Between 12 and 18 years)
27. At what age did the child attain puberty?
28. Details of delinquent behaviour if any
i. Stealing
ii. Pick pocketing
iii. Arrack selling
iv. Drug pedaling
v. Petty offences
vi. Violent crime
vii. Rape
viii. None of the above
ix. Others (please specify)
29. Reason for delinquent behaviour
i. Parental neglect
ii. Parental overprotection
iii. Parents criminal behavior

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 325
iv. Parents influence (negative)
v. Peer group influence - To buy drugs/alcohol
vi. Others (pl. specify)
30. Habits
A B
i) Smoking i) Watching TV/movies
ii) Alcohol consumption ii) Playing indoor/outdoor games
iii) Drug use (specify) iii) Reading books
iv) Gambling iv) Religious activities
v) Begging v) Drawing/painting/acting/singing
vi) Any other vi) Any other
EMPLOYMENT DETAILS
31. Employment details of the child prior to entry into the Home:
S.No. Details of employment Timing and Duration Wages earned
i) Cooly
ii) Rag picking
iii) Mechanic
iv) Hotel work
v) Tea shop work
vi) Shoe polish
vii) Household works
viii) Others (pl specify)
32. Details of income utilization:
Sent to family to meet family need
i. For dress materials
ii. For gambling
iii. For prostitution
iv. For alcohol
v. For drug
vi. For smoking
vii. Savings
33. Details of savings
i. With employers
ii. With friends

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
326 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
iii. Bank/Post Office
iv. Others (pl. specify)
34. Duration of working hours
i. Less than six hours
ii. Between six and eight hours
iii. More than eight hours
EDUCATIONAL DETAILS
35. The details of education of the child prior to the admission to Children’s Home
i. Illiterate
ii. Studied up to V Standard
iii. Studied above V Std but below VIII Standard
iv. Studied above VIII Std but below X Standard
v. Studied above X Standard
36. The reason for leaving the School
a. Failure in the class last studied
b. Lack of interest in the school activities
c. Indifferent attitude of the teachers
d. Peer group influence
e. To earn and support the family
f. Sudden demise of parents
g. Rigid school atmosphere
h. Absenteeism followed by running away from school
i. There is no age appropriate school nearby
j. Others (pl. specify)
37. The details of the school in which studied last:
i. Corporation/Municipal/Panchayat
ii. Government/SC Welfare School/BC Welfare School
iii. Private management/ Convents
38. Medium instruction: Hindi/English/Urdu/Tamil/Malayalam/Kannada/ Telugu/
Marathi / Gujarati/ Bengali / Other language (please specify)
39. After admission to Children’s Home, the educational attainment from the date of
admission till date;
No. of years Class studied Promoted /detained
40. Vocational training undergone form the date of admission into Children’s Home till date.
No. of years
Name of Vocational Trade
Proficiency Attained
Details of certification?

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 327
41. Extra-curricular activities developed form the date of admission into the Children’s Home till date
i) Scout
ii) Sports (please specify)
iii) Athletics (please specify)
iv) Drawing
v) Painting
vi) Others (pl. specify)
MEDICAL HISTORY
42. Height and weight at the time of admission:
43. Physical condition:
44. Medical history of child (gist):
45. Medical history of parent/guardian (gist):
46. Present health status of the child:
Sl. Annual Observation 1st Quarter 2nd Quarter 3rd Quarter 4th Quarter
No.
Date of Review
Height
Weight
Nutritious diet given
Stress
Dental
ENT
Eye
47. Height and Weight Chart
Date, Month and Year Height Admissible Weight Actual Weight
SOCIAL HISTORY
48. Details of friendship prior to admission into Children’s Home:
i. Co-workers
ii. School/Classmate
iii. Neighbours
iv. Others (pl. specify)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
328 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
49. Majority of the friends are
i. Educated
ii. Illiterate
iii. The same age group
iv. Older in age
v. Younger in age
vi. Same sex
vii. Opposite sex
50. Details of membership in group (please specify details)
i. Associated with cine fans association
ii. Association with religious group
iii. Associated with arts and sports club
iv. Associated with gangs
v. Associated with voluntary social service league
vi. Others (please specify)
51. The position of the child in the groups/league
i. Leader
ii. Second level leader
iii. Middle level functionary
iv. Ordinary member
52. Purpose of taking membership in the group:
i. For social service activities
ii. For leisure time spending
iii. For pleasure seeking activities
iv. For deviant activities
v. Others (please specify)
53. Attitude of the group / league
i. Respect the social norms and follow the rules
ii. Interested in violating the norms
iii. Impulsive in violating the rules
54. The location/meeting point of the groups
i. Usually at fixed place
ii. Places are changed frequently
iii. No specific places
iv. Meeting point is fixed conveniently
55. The reaction of the society when the child first came out of the family
i. Supportive
ii. Rejection

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 329
iii. Abuse
iv. Ill-treatment
v. Exploitation
56. The reaction of the police towards children
i. Compassionate
ii. Harsh
iii. Aggressive and abusive
iv. Exploitative
v. Ill-treated
57. The response of the general public towards the child ………………………….
HISTORY OF THE CHILD (Brief)
(i) Education
(ii) Health
(iii) Vocational training
(iv) Extra curricular activities
(v) Others
Suggestion of Child Welfare Officer/ Probation Officer after orientation to child and the response towards
orientation.
Follow up by Child Welfare Officer/ Probation Officer/ Case Worker/ Social Worker
Quarterly Review of Case History by Management Committee
PERSON IN CHARGE/ SUPERINTENDENT/ CHILD
WELFARE OFFICER/ PROBATION OFFICER
FORM 44
[Rule 82 (1)]
RELEASE CUM RESTORATION ORDER
(Name of the Child)……………….son/ daughter of……………………… residence…………………..
Case No./ Profile Number……………….. who was ordered to be placed in an observation home/place of
safety/ special home/Children’s Home/ by the Juvenile Justice Board/ Children’s Court/ Child Welfare
Committee ………………….under section…………….. of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act 2015, for a term of……………… on the ………………..day of……………..20…………….and
who is now in the …………………. Institution, at…………………..is directed to be released from the
said………Institution and supervision and the authority of…………….. during the remaining period of stay
as…………………………..reason for discharge).
This order is granted subject to the conditions hereon, upon the breach of any of which it shall be
liable to be revoked.
Dated ………….
Signature
Juvenile Justice Board/ Children’s Court/ Child Welfare Committee
Place:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
330 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Conditions:
1. The discharged person shall proceed to………………. and live under the supervision and authority
of…………………… until the expiry of the period of his stay in Children’s Homes or fit facility/ detention in
observation home/ special homes/ place of safety unless the remission is sooner cancelled.
2. He shall not, without the consent of the………………..remove himself from that place or any other place,
which may be named by the said ………………...
3. He shall obey such instruction as he may receive from the said ………………………………with regard to
punctual and regular attendance at school/vocation or otherwise.
4. He shall not get involved in any offence and shall lead a sober and industrious life to the satisfaction
of………………………………..
6. In the event of his committing a breach of any of the above conditions the remission of the period of stay
in the Institution hereby granted shall be liable to be cancelled and on such cancellation he/she shall be
dealt with under section 97 of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act 2015.
I hereby acknowledge that I am aware of the above conditions which have been read over/ explained to me
and that I accept the same.
(Signature or mark of the released child)
Certified that the conditions specified in the above order have been read over/explained to (Name
of child)……………………..and that he/she has accepted them as the conditions upon which his/her release
may be revoked.
Certified accordingly that the said child has been discharged on the………………….
Signature and Designation of the certifying authority
i.e. Person-in-charge of the institution
FORM 45
[Rules 82(4)]
ESCORT ORDER
Case No……………. In the matter of Boy/Girl Child
……………………………….
Aged about…………year taken
The Parents of the boy/girl child are reported to be residing at………………………..
He/She therefore be sent under supervision of a proper police / recognized non governmental
organization escort to the………………………………………………
For tracing and for handing over to the parents or close relatives of the said Boy Child/Girl Child
residing at the aforesaid address or at other Place which may be shown by the Child, if no such parents or
relative are traced or if traced but they are unwilling to take charge of the boy/girl be kept in the custody of
the Superintendent……………………………………..Children’s Home/ Place of Safety/ Observation Homes
of the said district and the said Boy/Girl child be produced before the concerned Child Welfare Committee/
Juvenile Justice Board for further orders.

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 331
Orders
Pending Escort, the said Boy/Girl Child shall remain in Children’s Home/ Place of Safety/
Observation Homes, residing at present at----------------------------- The State/District Child Protection Unit, or
Police Department and recognized Non-governmental organization/ Childline shall positively make
immediate arrangement not less than 15 days from the date of receipt of this order by him and send the
said Boy Child/Girl Child at his/her aforesaid place of residence.
Dated this…………………..day of……………………..20
Chairperson/Member
Child Welfare Committee
Juvenile Justice Board
CC to:
1.The Person in charge, Child Care Institution.
2.The District Child Protection Unit or non-governmental organization or Childline
Ref.: 1. Order of admission of minor……………born on………..Profile No……………
FORM 46
[Rule 41(3) and 41 (9)]
INSPECTION BY INSPECTION COMMITTEE
(Fill as applicable)
Date of visit: ………………………. Time of visit: …………………………
Name of the officials inspecting the Home:
1. ……………………………..
2. ……………………………
3. ……………………………
A. General Information :
i. Name and address of the Organisation:
.....................................................................................................................................................
......................................................................
ii. Registration No. (Under JJ Act, 2015): ……………………….
Date of issue : …………………………………………………………………..
Date of expiry : .................................................................................
iii. Complete address of the CCI :
……………………………………………......................................................................................................
...........................
………………………………………….
iv. Name of the Officer/Person-in-Charge:
…………………………………………………………………………
v. Contact No: …………………………. Email Id: ………………………………………………..
………………………………………...........

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
332 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
vi. Type of Home (Please tick  one):
Observation Home/ Special Home/ Place of Safety/ Children’s Home/ Open Shelter / Any other
(please specify):
vii If Aided/supported: by State Government, Name of the Department:
viii If run by Government:
B. Status of Children:
(i) Sanction capacity of the Home………………………….
(ii ) Are the children of both sexes below 10 years kept in the same home
Yes No
If yes, number of such children as on today………………….
( iii) Are the bathing and sleeping facilities maintained separately for boys and girls in the age
group of 5-10 years
Yes No
(iv) Are children segregated in the age group given below? Give number of children in the age group
of
i. 7-11 years:
ii. 12- 18 years:
iii. Are there children in the age group of 0-5 years staying there?
Yes No If yes, Give numbers:
iv. Are there children above 18 years staying there?
Yes No If yes, Give numbers:
v. No. of new admissions in the current month……………………………
vi. No. of children who have moved out/released…………………………….
vii. No. of children referred by CWC/JJB during the month………………….
viii. No. of children produced before CWC/JJB during the month……………..
ix. No. of children as on last day of the previous month …………………….
x. No. of children with special needs, if yes, give details……………………..
xi. Interventions made for their rehabilitation: ………………………………..........
..........................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................................................................................
..........................
xii. Are the Individual care plans prepared for every child? Yes No
C. Infrastructure:
• Building:
• Rented:……………… Owned…………………………….

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 333
• Are CCTV cameras installed at the entrance Yes No
• Security Adequate Inadequate
• Sufficient space to accommodate the children: Yes No
Space available:
No. of rooms / dormitories Details
Provision of sick room / medical unit
Counseling room
Recreational / activity room for Children
• Is there a TV set available with Cable network Yes No
• How often are children allowed to view TV in the evenings or any time
• Are children playing games indoors
Yes No
• What games are available to them
age appropriate games or not
• Are children playing games outdoors Yes No
• Do they have equipments/ accessories to play Yes No
• Do children go for picnics/excursions
Yes No
• Do they have interactions with eminent
personalities
• Is there a recreation room available to children
Yes No
Kitchen / Dining Room
• Is the cooking area and pantry separate Yes No
• Do children get individual thalis, mugs glasses Yes No
• Are cooking utensils adequate and clean Yes No
• Is there a fridge available for children
Yes No
• Is there a Oven available for children Yes No
• Is there a Gas stove available in kitchen
Yes No
Yes No
• Is there a chimney available
safe/away from children or not
• What is the arrangement to keep the gas
cylinders Yes No
• Adequate water supply for washing, cooking
Yes No
• Adequate drinking water available ( RO)

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
334 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
• Is cooking done by machines or by cook
Number of toilets & bathrooms for
Children Yes No
• Flush is working Yes No
• Taps in the wash basin are functioning Yes No
• Is the floor slippery Yes No
• Drains clean Yes No
• Drains are clogged Yes No
• Fittings for hanging clothes/ towels in place once or more in a day
• Cob webs are removed Yes No
• Door has a latch Yes No
• Door has peep holes Yes No
• Frequency of bath a child is allowed Yes No
• Water is adequately available Yes No
• Adequate numbers of buckets and mugs Yes No
• Personal toiletries are provided Yes No
• Is washing powder or soap given Yes No
• Do children wash their own clothes Yes No
• Is there a washer man available Yes No
• Is the washing machine functional Yes No
Open space for outdoor activities
Class rooms
space for vocational training
Premises
• Does the home have a child friendly indoors? Yes No
• How often is the sweeping, swabbing done? Twice a day or more
• Are the children involved in cleaning exercise during class hours?
Yes No
• Are the facilities of coolers/ heaters available for children? Yes No
• Are the doors and windows maintained properly? Yes No
• Are the rooms and dormitories well ventilated? Yes No
• Is there an alternate provision for lights and fans when there is no electricity available?
Yes No
• Are the outdoors clean, pleasant and child friendly? Yes No

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 335
Clothing / Bedding/Lockers/ Toiletries provided to the children:
• Are the clothes provided as per size and season Yes No
• Frequency of changing undergarments Yes No
• New clothes are stitched or bought stitched or bought
• Are the mattresses given individually Yes No
• Are pillows given individually Yes No
• Are the mattress and pillows clean Yes No
• Do children have separate cupboards Yes No
• Are bed sheets and Khes available Yes No
• Are blankets available in winters Yes No
• Number of sets provided on arrival one/two/three/four
• Frequency of providing new clothes Monthly/ Quarterly
• Are these sets of same color or different colors? Same/different
• Are children provided with individual lockers to keep their personal items Yes No
Other articles provided to the children: ………………………………………………..
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………………
D. Services provided to the children:
• Medical facilities/ Maintenance of Health Cards: …………………………….........
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
............................................................................................................................
• Nutrition / Special Diet: ………………………………………………………………….
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………….
• Provision of safe drinking water: ..................................................................
......................................................................................................................
• Daily Routine of Children:

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
336 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
Time Activities / Schedule
Morning
Day Time
Afternoon
Evening
Late evening/
Night
• Education ( Formal Education / NFE & Life Skill Training Programme) :
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
• Computer/ Internet/ Phone
• Is the facility of Computer with internet available? Yes No
• Is the facility functional? Yes No
• Are the children allowed to use the facility? Yes No
• Is the telephone for official purposes only Yes No
• Are the children allowed to use telephone fixed timing/ as and when required
• Is the number of Childline (1098) displayed near the phone Yes No
• Counseling/ Guidance services/special educator/physiotherapist, etc. provided :
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………………
• Vocational training: ....................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
• Recreational facilities: ..................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
• Linkages developed with other agencies/ departments: ................................
...........................................................................................................................
• Implementation of track the missing child programme: .................................
- Entries of children in track the missing child website: ..................................
...........................................................................................................................

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 337
- User Id and password provided: ...................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
• Other programmes and activities initiated: ...................................................
...........................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
E. Staff Details :
S.N. Name Designation Date of Attendance at Remarks
Joining the time of
visit
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
338 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
F. Children’s Committee / Management Committee
• Formation of Children’s Committee : YES NO
• Age wise formation of Children’s Committee :
• Frequency of Children’s Committee Meeting:
• ..................................................................................................................................
• Formation of Management Committee :
YES NO
• Date of constitution of Management Committee and frequency of meetings held :
................................................................................................................................
G. Record Maintenance :
Staff attendance register
Children attendance register
Central admission register
Individual case file with individual care plan
Communication with CWC/JJB
Children’s suggestion book
Children’s suggestion box
Medical file / medical cards
Personal belongings register
Management Committee – minutes register
Children’s Committee - minutes register
Nutrition / Diet File
Any other record maintained

--- juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015rules-2016-hindi-english.pdf ---
¹Hkkx µ[k.M 3 º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k
II (i) 339
Observations/ Remarks:
.............................................................................................................................
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
Name of inspection Committee member:
Signature:
[F. No.1-2/2016-CW-II]
RASHMI SAXENA SAHNI, Jt. Secy.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
jftLVªh laö Mhö ,yö&33004@99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
vlk/kj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II—[k.M 3—mi&[k.M (ii)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii)
izkf/dkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
la- 96] ubZ fnYyh] cq/okj] tuojh 13] 2016@ikS"k 23] 1937
No. 96] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 13, 2016/ PAUSA 23 , 1937
    (cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:14) 

 (cid:4)(cid:6) , 12 , 2016
........ 111111110000(((())))....————(cid:10)(cid:11) , (cid:4) (cid:18)  ((cid:20) (cid:21)   (cid:26)) , 2015 (2016  2) (cid:21) 
1 (cid:21) - (3) (cid:31) ! $ (cid:20)    &, 15 , 2016     ( (cid:10)     $ 
 !  
[. 1 (cid:6) - II/11/4/2015-1 (cid:6) .II]
3  $   , $  
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 12th January, 2016
S.O. 110(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 1 of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), the Central Government hereby appoints the 15th day of January,
2016 as the date on which the said Act shall come into force.
[No. CW-II-11/4/2015-CW.II]
RASHMI SAXENA SAHNI, Jt. Secy.
177 GI/2016
Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—16
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—16
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx [k.M
II — 1
PART II—Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ ubZ fnYyh] lkseokj] tuojh 11] 2016@ikS"k 21] 1937 ¼'kd½
10]
No. 10] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, JANUARY 11, 2016/PAUSHA 21, 1937 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 11th January, 2016/Pausha 21, 1937 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 8th January,
2015, and is hereby published for general information:—
THE SUGAR CESS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015
NO. 9 OF 2016
[8th January, 2016.]
An Act further to amend the Sugar Cess Act, 1982.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Sugar Cess (Amendment) Act, 2015. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Sugar Cess Act, 1982, in section 3, in sub-section (1), for the words Amendment
“twenty-five rupees”, the words “two hundred rupees” shall be substituted. of section 3
of Act 3 of
1982.
————
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— SEC. 1]
CORRIGENDA
In the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), as
published in a Gazette of India, Extraodinary, Part II, Section 1, issue No. 2, dated the
1st January, 2016,—
(a) at page 13, line 20, for “applealable”, read “appealable”;
(b) at page 22,—
(i) in line 39, for “protection of children”, read “protection or children”;
(ii) in line 44, for “fulfill”, read “fulfil”;
(c) at page 40, line 29, for “clause (18)”, read “clause (17)”.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI—2016.
GMGIPMRND—4089GI(S3)—11-01-2016.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—16
REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—16
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx [k.M
II — 1
PART II—Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lña ubZ fnYyh] 'kqØokj] tuojh 1] 2016@ikS"k 11] 1937 ¼'kd½
2]
No. 2] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, JANUARY 1, 2016/PAUSHA 11, 1937 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 1st January, 2016/Pausha 11, 1937 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
31st December, 2015, and is hereby published for general information:—
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
ACT, 2015
NO. 2 OF 2016
[31st December, 2015.]
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and found to
be in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection by catering
to their basic needs through proper care, protection, development, treatment,
social re-integration, by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication
and disposal of matters in the best interest of children and for their rehabilitation
through processes provided, and institutions and bodies established,
hereinunder and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS, the provisions of the Constitution confer powers and impose duties, under
clause (3) of article 15, clauses (e) and (f) of article 39, article 45 and article 47, on the State
to ensure that all the needs of children are met and that their basic human rights are fully
protected;
AND WHEREAS, the Government of India has acceded on the 11th December, 1992 to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by the General Assembly of United
Nations, which has prescribed a set of standards to be adhered to by all State parties in
securing the best interest of the child;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
AND WHEREAS, it is expedient to re-enact the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 to make comprehensive provisions for children alleged and found to be 56 of 2000.
in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection, taking into consideration
the standards prescribed in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations
Standard Minimum Rules for the Administration of Juvenile Justice, 1985 (the Beijing Rules),
the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty (1990),
the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Inter-
country Adoption (1993), and other related international instruments.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Short title, 1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
extent, Act, 2015.
commencement
and (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
application.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the provisions of this Act shall apply to all matters concerning children in need of care and
protection and children in conflict with law, including —
(i) apprehension, detention, prosecution, penalty or imprisonment, rehabilitation
and social re-integration of children in conflict with law;
(ii) procedures and decisions or orders relating to rehabilitation, adoption,
re-integration, and restoration of children in need of care and protection.
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) “abandoned child” means a child deserted by his biological or adoptive
parents or guardians, who has been declared as abandoned by the Committee after
due inquiry;
(2) “adoption” means the process through which the adopted child is permanently
separated from his biological parents and becomes the lawful child of his adoptive
parents with all the rights, privileges and responsibilities that are attached to a biological
child;
(3) “adoption regulations” means the regulations framed by the Authority and
notified by the Central Government in respect of adoption;
(4) “administrator” means any district official not below the rank of Deputy
Secretary to the State, on whom magisterial powers have been conferred;
(5) “aftercare” means making provision of support, financial or otherwise, to
persons, who have completed the age of eighteen years but have not completed the
age of twenty-one years, and have left any institutional care to join the mainstream of
the society;
(6) “authorised foreign adoption agency” means a foreign social or child welfare
agency that is authorised by the Central Adoption Resource Authority on the
recommendation of their Central Authority or Government department of that country
for sponsoring the application of non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or
persons of Indian origin or foreign prospective adoptive parents for adoption of a
child from India;
(7) “Authority” means the Central Adoption Resource Authority constituted
under section 68;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
(8) “begging” means—
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place or entering into any private
premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms, under any pretence;
(ii) exposing or exhibiting with the object of obtaining or extorting alms,
any sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other
person or of an animal;
(9) “best interest of child” means the basis for any decision taken regarding the
child, to ensure fulfilment of his basic rights and needs, identity, social well-being and
physical, emotional and intellectual development;
(10) “Board” means a Juvenile Justice Board constituted under section 4;
(11) “Central Authority” means the Government department recognised as such
under the Hague Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in
Inter-country Adoption (1993);
(12) “child” means a person who has not completed eighteen years of age;
(13) “child in conflict with law” means a child who is alleged or found to have
committed an offence and who has not completed eighteen years of age on the date of
commission of such offence;
(14) “child in need of care and protection” means a child—
(i) who is found without any home or settled place of abode and without
any ostensible means of subsistence; or
(ii) who is found working in contravention of labour laws for the time
being in force or is found begging, or living on the street; or
(iii) who resides with a person (whether a guardian of the child or not) and
such person—
(a) has injured, exploited, abused or neglected the child or has
violated any other law for the time being in force meant for the protection
of child; or
(b) has threatened to kill, injure, exploit or abuse the child and there
is a reasonable likelihood of the threat being carried out; or
(c) has killed, abused, neglected or exploited some other child or
children and there is a reasonable likelihood of the child in question being
killed, abused, exploited or neglected by that person; or
(iv) who is mentally ill or mentally or physically challenged or suffering
from terminal or incurable disease, having no one to support or look after or
having parents or guardians unfit to take care, if found so by the Board or the
Committee; or
(v) who has a parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is found to
be unfit or incapacitated, by the Committee or the Board, to care for and protect
the safety and well-being of the child; or
(vi) who does not have parents and no one is willing to take care of, or
whose parents have abandoned or surrendered him; or
(vii) who is missing or run away child, or whose parents cannot be found
after making reasonable inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed; or
(viii) who has been or is being or is likely to be abused, tortured or exploited
for the purpose of sexual abuse or illegal acts; or
(ix) who is found vulnerable and is likely to be inducted into drug abuse or
trafficking; or

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(x) who is being or is likely to be abused for unconscionable gains; or
(xi) who is victim of or affected by any armed conflict, civil unrest or
natural calamity; or
(xii) who is at imminent risk of marriage before attaining the age of marriage
and whose parents, family members, guardian and any other persons are likely
to be responsible for solemnisation of such marriage;
(15) “child friendly” means any behaviour, conduct, practice, process, attitude,
environment or treatment that is humane, considerate and in the best interest of the
child;
(16) “child legally free for adoption” means a child declared as such by the
Committee after making due inquiry under section 38;
(17) “Child Welfare Officer” means an officer attached to a Children’s Home, for
carrying out the directions given by the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board
with such responsibility as may be prescribed;
(18) “Child Welfare Police Officer” means an officer designated as such under
sub-section (1) of section 107;
(19) “Children’s Home” means a Children’s Home, established or maintained, in
every district or group of districts, by the State Government, either by itself, or through
a voluntary or non-governmental organisation, and is registered as such for the
purposes specified in section 50;
(20) “Children’s Court’’ means a court established under the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 or a Special Court under the Protection of Children 4 of 2006.
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, wherever existing and where such courts have not 32 of 2012.
been designated, the Court of Sessions having jurisdiction to try offences under the
Act;
(21) “child care institution” means Children Home, open shelter, observation
home, special home, place of safety, Specialised Adoption Agency and a fit facility
recognised under this Act for providing care and protection to children, who are in
need of such services;
(22) “Committee” means Child Welfare Committee constituted under
section 27;
(23) “court” means a civil court, which has jurisdiction in matters of adoption
and guardianship and may include the District Court, Family Court and City Civil
Courts;
(24) “corporal punishment” means the subjecting of a child by any person to
physical punishment that involves the deliberate infliction of pain as retribution for an
offence, or for the purpose of disciplining or reforming the child;
(25) “childline services” means a twenty-four hours emergency outreach service
for children in crisis which links them to emergency or long-term care and rehabilitation
service;
(26) “District Child Protection Unit” means a Child Protection Unit for a District,
established by the State Government under section 106, which is the focal point to
ensure the implementation of this Act and other child protection measures in the
district;
(27) “fit facility” means a facility being run by a governmental organisation or a
registered voluntary or non-governmental organisation, prepared to temporarily own
the responsibility of a particular child for a specific purpose, and such facility is
recognised as fit for the said purpose, by the Committee, as the case may be, or the
Board, under sub-section (1) of section 51;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
(28) “fit person” means any person, prepared to own the responsibility of a
child, for a specific purpose, and such person is identified after inquiry made in this
behalf and recognised as fit for the said purpose, by the Committee or, as the case may
be, the Board, to receive and take care of the child;
(29) “foster care” means placement of a child, by the Committee for the purpose
of alternate care in the domestic environment of a family, other than the child’s biological
family, that has been selected, qualified, approved and supervised for providing such
care;
(30) “foster family” means a family found suitable by the District Child Protection
Unit to keep children in foster care under section 44;
(31) “guardian” in relation to a child, means his natural guardian or any other
person having, in the opinion of the Committee or, as the case may be, the Board, the
actual charge of the child, and recognised by the Committee or, as the case may be, the
Board as a guardian in the course of proceedings;
(32) “group foster care” means a family like care facility for children in need of
care and protection who are without parental care, aiming on providing personalised
care and fostering a sense of belonging and identity, through family like and community
based solutions;
(33) “heinous offences” includes the offences for which the minimum punishment
45 of 1860. under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force is imprisonment
for seven years or more;
(34) “inter-country adoption” means adoption of a child from India by non-
resident Indian or by a person of Indian origin or by a foreigner;
(35) “juvenile” means a child below the age of eighteen years;
(36) “narcotic drug” and “psychotropic substance” shall have the meanings,
respectively, assigned to them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
61 of 1985. Act, 1985;
(37) “no objection certificate” for inter-country adoption means a certificate
issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority for the said purpose;
(38) “non-resident Indian” means a person who holds an Indian passport and is
presently residing abroad for more than one year;
(39) “notification” means the notification published in the Official Gazette of
India, or as the case may be, in the Gazette of a State, and the expression “notify” shall
be construed accordingly;
(40) “observation home” means an observation home established and maintained
in every district or group of districts by a State Government, either by itself, or through
a voluntary or non-governmental organisation, and is registered as such, for the
purposes specified in sub-section (1) of section 47;
(41) “open shelter” means a facility for children, established and maintained by
the State Government, either by itself, or through a voluntary or non-governmental
organisation under sub-section (1) of section 43, and registered as such, for the purposes
specified in that section;
(42) “orphan” means a child—
(i) who is without biological or adoptive parents or legal guardian; or
(ii) whose legal guardian is not willing to take, or capable of taking care of
the child;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(43) “overseas citizen of India” means a person registered as such under the
Citizenship Act, 1955; 57 of 1955.
(44) “person of Indian origin” means a person, any of whose lineal ancestors is
or was an Indian national, and who is presently holding a Person of Indian Origin Card
issued by the Central Government;
(45) “petty offences” includes the offences for which the maximum punishment
under the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force is imprisonment 45 of 1860.
up to three years;
(46) “place of safety” means any place or institution, not being a police lockup
or jail, established separately or attached to an observation home or a special home, as
the case may be, the person in-charge of which is willing to receive and take care of the
children alleged or found to be in conflict with law, by an order of the Board or the
Children’s Court, both during inquiry and ongoing rehabilitation after having been
found guilty for a period and purpose as specified in the order;
(47) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(48) “probation officer” means an officer appointed by the State Government as
a probation officer under the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 or the Legal-cum- 20 of 1958.
Probation Officer appointed by the State Government under District Child Protection
Unit;
(49) “prospective adoptive parents” means a person or persons eligible to adopt
a child as per the provisions of section 57;
(50) “public place” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in the Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956; 104 of 1956.
(51) “registered”, with reference to child care institutions or agencies or facilities
managed by the State Government, or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation,
means observation homes, special homes, place of safety, children’s homes, open
shelters or Specialised Adoption Agency or fit facility or any other institution that may
come up in response to a particular need or agencies or facilities authorised and
registered under section 41, for providing residential care to children, on a short-term
or long-term basis;
(52) “relative”, in relation to a child for the purpose of adoption under this Act,
means a paternal uncle or aunt, or a maternal uncle or aunt, or paternal grandparent or
maternal grandparent;
(53) “State Agency” means the State Adoption Resource Agency set up by the
State Government for dealing with adoption and related matters under section 67;
(54) “serious offences” includes the offences for which the punishment under
the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in force, is imprisonment 45 of 1860.
between three to seven years;
(55) “special juvenile police unit” means a unit of the police force of a district or
city or, as the case may be, any other police unit like railway police, dealing with
children and designated as such for handling children under section 107;
(56) “special home” means an institution established by a State Government or
by a voluntary or non-governmental organisation, registered under section 48, for
housing and providing rehabilitative services to children in conflict with law, who are
found, through inquiry, to have committed an offence and are sent to such institution
by an order of the Board;
(57) “Specialised Adoption Agency” means an institution established by the
State Government or by a voluntary or non-governmental organisation and recognised

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7
under section 65, for housing orphans, abandoned and surrendered children, placed
there by order of the Committee, for the purpose of adoption;
(58) “sponsorship” means provision of supplementary support, financial or
otherwise, to the families to meet the medical, educational and developmental needs of
the child;
(59) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator
of that Union territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution;
(60) “surrendered child” means a child, who is relinquished by the parent or
guardian to the Committee, on account of physical, emotional and social factors beyond
their control, and declared as such by the Committee;
(61) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in
other Acts shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN
3. The Central Government, the State Governments, the Board, and other agencies, as General
the case may be, while implementing the provisions of this Act shall be guided by the principles to
following fundamental principles, namely:–– be followed in
administration
(i) Principle of presumption of innocence: Any child shall be presumed to be an of Act.
innocent of any mala fide or criminal intent up to the age of eighteen years.
(ii) Principle of dignity and worth: All human beings shall be treated with equal
dignity and rights.
(iii) Principle of participation: Every child shall have a right to be heard and to
participate in all processes and decisions affecting his interest and the child’s views
shall be taken into consideration with due regard to the age and maturity of the child.
(iv) Principle of best interest: All decisions regarding the child shall be based on
the primary consideration that they are in the best interest of the child and to help the
child to develop full potential.
(v) Principle of family responsibility: The primary responsibility of care, nurture
and protection of the child shall be that of the biological family or adoptive or foster
parents, as the case may be.
(vi) Principle of safety: All measures shall be taken to ensure that the child is
safe and is not subjected to any harm, abuse or maltreatment while in contact with the
care and protection system, and thereafter.
(vii) Positive measures: All resources are to be mobilised including those of
family and community, for promoting the well-being, facilitating development of identity
and providing an inclusive and enabling environment, to reduce vulnerabilities of
children and the need for intervention under this Act.
(viii) Principle of non-stigmatising semantics: Adversarial or accusatory words
are not to be used in the processes pertaining to a child.
(ix) Principle of non-waiver of rights: No waiver of any of the right of the child
is permissible or valid, whether sought by the child or person acting on behalf of the
child, or a Board or a Committee and any non-exercise of a fundamental right shall not
amount to waiver.
(x) Principle of equality and non-discrimination: There shall be no
discrimination against a child on any grounds including sex, caste, ethnicity, place of
birth, disability and equality of access, opportunity and treatment shall be provided to
every child.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(xi) Principle of right to privacy and confidentiality: Every child shall have a
right to protection of his privacy and confidentiality, by all means and throughout the
judicial process.
(xii) Principle of institutionalisation as a measure of last resort: A child shall
be placed in institutional care as a step of last resort after making a reasonable inquiry.
(xiii) Principle of repatriation and restoration: Every child in the juvenile justice
system shall have the right to be re-united with his family at the earliest and to be
restored to the same socio-economic and cultural status that he was in, before coming
under the purview of this Act, unless such restoration and repatriation is not in his
best interest.
(xiv) Principle of fresh start: All past records of any child under the Juvenile
Justice system should be erased except in special circumstances.
(xv) Principle of diversion: Measures for dealing with children in conflict with
law without resorting to judicial proceedings shall be promoted unless it is in the best
interest of the child or the society as a whole.
(xvi) Principles of natural justice: Basic procedural standards of fairness shall
be adhered to, including the right to a fair hearing, rule against bias and the right to
review, by all persons or bodies, acting in a judicial capacity under this Act.
CHAPTER III
JUVENILE JUSTICE BOARD
Juvenile 4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 2 of 1974.
Justice Board. the State Government shall, constitute for every district, one or more Juvenile Justice
Boards for exercising the powers and discharging its functions relating to children in conflict
with law under this Act.
(2) A Board shall consist of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of First
Class not being Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate (hereinafter
referred to as Principal Magistrate) with at least three years experience and two social
workers selected in such manner as may be prescribed, of whom at least one shall be a
woman, forming a Bench and every such Bench shall have the powers conferred by the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be, a 2 of 1974.
Judicial Magistrate of First Class.
(3) No social worker shall be appointed as a member of the Board unless such person
has been actively involved in health, education, or welfare activities pertaining to children
for atleast seven years or a practicing professional with a degree in child psychology,
psychiatry, sociology or law.
(4) No person shall be eligible for selection as a member of the Board, if he ––
(i) has any past record of violation of human rights or child rights;
(ii) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude, and such
conviction has not been reversed or has not been granted full pardon in respect of
such offence;
(iii) has been removed or dismissed from service of the Central Government or a
State Government or an undertaking or corporation owned or controlled by the Central
Government or a State Government;
(iv) has ever indulged in child abuse or employment of child labour or any other
violation of human rights or immoral act.
(5) The State Government shall ensure that induction training and sensitisation of all
members including Principal Magistrate of the Board on care, protection, rehabilitation,
legal provisions and justice for children, as may be prescribed, is provided within a period
of sixty days from the date of appointment.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
(6) The term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which such
member may resign shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(7) The appointment of any member of the Board, except the Principal Magistrate,
may be terminated after holding an inquiry by the State Government, if he ––
(i) has been found guilty of misuse of power vested under this Act; or
(ii) fails to attend the proceedings of the Board consecutively for three months
without any valid reason; or
(iii) fails to attend less than three-fourths of the sittings in a year; or
(iv) becomes ineligible under sub-section (4) during his term as a member.
5. Where an inquiry has been initiated in respect of any child under this Act, and Placement of
during the course of such inquiry, the child completes the age of eighteen years, then, person, who
cease to be a
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in
child during
force, the inquiry may be continued by the Board and orders may be passed in respect of
process of
such person as if such person had continued to be a child. inquiry.
6. (1) Any person, who has completed eighteen years of age, and is apprehended for Placement of
committing an offence when he was below the age of eighteen years, then, such person persons, who
committed an
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be treated as a child during the process of
offence, when
inquiry.
person was
below the age
(2) The person referred to in sub-section (1), if not released on bail by the Board shall
of eighteen
be placed in a place of safety during the process of inquiry. years.
(3) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be treated as per the procedure
specified under the provisions of this Act.
7. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and shall observe such rules in regard to the Procedure in
transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed and shall ensure that all relation to
Board.
procedures are child friendly and that the venue is not intimidating to the child and does not
resemble as regular courts.
(2) A child in conflict with law may be produced before an individual member of the
Board, when the Board is not in sitting.
(3) A Board may act notwithstanding the absence of any member of the Board, and no
order passed by the Board shall be invalid by the reason only of the absence of any member
during any stage of proceedings:
Provided that there shall be atleast two members including the Principal Magistrate
present at the time of final disposal of the case or in making an order under sub-section (3)
of section 18.
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Board in the
interim or final disposal, the opinion of the majority shall prevail, but where there is no such
majority, the opinion of the Principal Magistrate, shall prevail.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force Powers,
but save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Board constituted for any district functions and
responsibilities
shall have the power to deal exclusively with all the proceedings under this Act, relating to
of the Board.
children in conflict with law, in the area of jurisdiction of such Board.
(2) The powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act may also be exercised by
the High Court and the Children’s Court, when the proceedings come before them under
section 19 or in appeal, revision or otherwise.
(3) The functions and responsibilities of the Board shall include’––
(a) ensuring the informed participation of the child and the parent or guardian, in
every step of the process;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(b) ensuring that the child’s rights are protected throughout the process of
apprehending the child, inquiry, aftercare and rehabilitation;
(c) ensuring availability of legal aid for the child through the legal services
institutions;
(d) wherever necessary the Board shall provide an interpreter or translator, having
such qualifications, experience, and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, to
the child if he fails to understand the language used in the proceedings;
(e) directing the Probation Officer, or in case a Probation Officer is not available
to the Child Welfare Officer or a social worker, to undertake a social investigation into
the case and submit a social investigation report within a period of fifteen days from
the date of first production before the Board to ascertain the circumstances in which
the alleged offence was committed;
(f) adjudicate and dispose of cases of children in conflict with law in accordance
with the process of inquiry specified in section 14;
(g) transferring to the Committee, matters concerning the child alleged to be in
conflict with law, stated to be in need of care and protection at any stage, thereby
recognising that a child in conflict with law can also be a child in need of care
simultaneously and there is a need for the Committee and the Board to be both involved;
(h) disposing of the matter and passing a final order that includes an individual
care plan for the child’s rehabilitation, including follow up by the Probation Officer or
the District Child Protection Unit or a member of a non-governmental organisation, as
may be required;
(i) conducting inquiry for declaring fit persons regarding care of children in
conflict with law;
(j) conducting at least one inspection visit every month of residential facilities
for children in conflict with law and recommend action for improvement in quality of
services to the District Child Protection Unit and the State Government;
(k) order the police for registration of first information report for offences
committed against any child in conflict with law, under this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, on a complaint made in this regard;
(l) order the police for registration of first information report for offences
committed against any child in need of care and protection, under this Act or any other
law for the time being in force, on a written complaint by a Committee in this regard;
(m) conducting regular inspection of jails meant for adults to check if any child
is lodged in such jails and take immediate measures for transfer of such a child to the
observation home; and
(n) any other function as may be prescribed.
Procedure to be 9. (1) When a Magistrate, not empowered to exercise the powers of the Board under
followed by a this Act is of the opinion that the person alleged to have committed the offence and brought
Magistrate who
before him is a child, he shall, without any delay, record such opinion and forward the child
has not been
immediately along with the record of such proceedings to the Board having jurisdiction.
empowered
under this Act. (2) In case a person alleged to have committed an offence claims before a court other
than a Board, that the person is a child or was a child on the date of commission of the
offence, or if the court itself is of the opinion that the person was a child on the date of
commission of the offence, the said court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may
be necessary (but not an affidavit) to determine the age of such person, and shall record a
finding on the matter, stating the age of the person as nearly as may be:
Provided that such a claim may be raised before any court and it shall be recognised
at any stage, even after final disposal of the case, and such a claim shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions contained in this Act and the rules made thereunder even if
the person has ceased to be a child on or before the date of commencement of this Act.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11
(3) If the court finds that a person has committed an offence and was a child on the
date of commission of such offence, it shall forward the child to the Board for passing
appropriate orders and the sentence, if any, passed by the court shall be deemed to have no
effect.
(4) In case a person under this section is required to be kept in protective custody,
while the person’s claim of being a child is being inquired into, such person may be placed,
in the intervening period in a place of safety.
CHAPTER IV
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW
10. (1) As soon as a child alleged to be in conflict with law is apprehended by the Apprehension
police, such child shall be placed under the charge of the special juvenile police unit or the of child
alleged to be
designated child welfare police officer, who shall produce the child before the Board without
in conflict
any loss of time but within a period of twenty-four hours of apprehending the child excluding
with law.
the time necessary for the journey, from the place where such child was apprehended:
Provided that in no case, a child alleged to be in conflict with law shall be placed in a
police lockup or lodged in a jail.
(2) The State Government shall make rules consistent with this Act,—
(i) to provide for persons through whom (including registered voluntary or non-
governmental organisations) any child alleged to be in conflict with law may be
produced before the Board;
(ii) to provide for the manner in which the child alleged to be in conflict with law
may be sent to an observation home or place of safety, as the case may be.
11. Any person in whose charge a child in conflict with law is placed, shall while the Role of
order is in force, have responsibility of the said child, as if the said person was the child’s person in
whose charge
parent and responsible for the child’s maintenance:
child in
Provided that the child shall continue in such person’s charge for the period stated conflict with
law is placed.
by the Board, notwithstanding that the said child is claimed by the parents or any other
person except when the Board is of the opinion that the parent or any other person are fit to
exercise charge over such child.
12.(1) When any person, who is apparently a child and is alleged to have committed Bail to a
a bailable or non-bailable offence, is apprehended or detained by the police or appears or person who is
apparently a
brought before a Board, such person shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the
child alleged
2 of 1974. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in force, be released to be in
on bail with or without surety or placed under the supervision of a probation officer or conflict with
under the care of any fit person: law.
Provided that such person shall not be so released if there appears reasonable grounds
for believing that the release is likely to bring that person into association with any known
criminal or expose the said person to moral, physical or psychological danger or the person’s
release would defeat the ends of justice, and the Board shall record the reasons for denying
the bail and circumstances that led to such a decision.
(2) When such person having been apprehended is not released on bail under sub-
section (1) by the officer-in-charge of the police station, such officer shall cause the person
to be kept only in an observation home in such manner as may be prescribed until the
person can be brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub-section (1) by the Board, it
shall make an order sending him to an observation home or a place of safety, as the case may
be, for such period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding the person, as may be
specified in the order.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(4) When a child in conflict with law is unable to fulfil the conditions of bail order
within seven days of the bail order, such child shall be produced before the Board for
modification of the conditions of bail.
Information 13. (1) Where a child alleged to be in conflict with law is apprehended, the officer
to parents, designated as Child Welfare Police Officer of the police station, or the special juvenile
guardian or
police unit to which such child is brought, shall, as soon as possible after apprehending the
probation
child, inform —
officer.
(i) the parent or guardian of such child, if they can be found, and direct them to
be present at the Board before which the child is produced; and
(ii) the probation officer, or if no probation officer is available, a Child Welfare
Officer, for preparation and submission within two weeks to the Board, a social
investigation report containing information regarding the antecedents and family
background of the child and other material circumstances likely to be of assistance to
the Board for making the inquiry.
(2) Where a child is released on bail, the probation officer or the Child Welfare Officer
shall be informed by the Board.
Inquiry by 14. (1) Where a child alleged to be in conflict with law is produced before Board, the
Board Board shall hold an inquiry in accordance with the provisions of this Act and may pass
regarding such orders in relation to such child as it deems fit under sections 17 and 18 of this Act.
child in
conflict with (2) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of four months
law. from the date of first production of the child before the Board, unless the period is extended,
for a maximum period of two more months by the Board, having regard to the circumstances
of the case and after recording the reasons in writing for such extension.
(3) A preliminary assessment in case of heinous offences under section 15 shall be
disposed of by the Board within a period of three months from the date of first production
of the child before the Board.
(4) If inquiry by the Board under sub-section (2) for petty offences remains
inconclusive even after the extended period, the proceedings shall stand terminated:
Provided that for serious or heinous offences, in case the Board requires further
extension of time for completion of inquiry, the same shall be granted by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate or, as the case may be, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, for reasons to be
recorded in writing.
(5) The Board shall take the following steps to ensure fair and speedy inquiry, namely:—
(a) at the time of initiating the inquiry, the Board shall satisfy itself that the child
in conflict with law has not been subjected to any ill-treatment by the police or by any
other person, including a lawyer or probation officer and take corrective steps in case
of such ill-treatment;
(b) in all cases under the Act, the proceedings shall be conducted in simple
manner as possible and care shall be taken to ensure that the child, against whom the
proceedings have been instituted, is given child-friendly atmosphere during the
proceedings;
(c) every child brought before the Board shall be given the opportunity of being
heard and participate in the inquiry;
(d) cases of petty offences, shall be disposed of by the Board through summary
proceedings, as per the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973; 2 of 1974.
(e) inquiry of serious offences shall be disposed of by the Board, by following
the procedure, for trial in summons cases under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 2 of 1974.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
(f) inquiry of heinous offences,—
(i) for child below the age of sixteen years as on the date of commission of
an offence shall be disposed of by the Board under clause (e);
(ii) for child above the age of sixteen years as on the date of commission
of an offence shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed under section 15.
15. (1) In case of a heinous offence alleged to have been committed by a child, who has Preliminary
completed or is above the age of sixteen years, the Board shall conduct a preliminary assessment
into heinous
assessment with regard to his mental and physical capacity to commit such offence, ability
offences by
to understand the consequences of the offence and the circumustances in which he allegedly
Board.
committed the offence, and may pass an order in accordance with the provisions of sub-
section (3) of section 18:
Provided that for such an assessment, the Board may take the assistance of experienced
psychologists or psycho-social workers or other experts.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is clarified that preliminary
assessment is not a trial, but is to assess the capacity of such child to commit and understand
the consequences of the alleged offence.
(2) Where the Board is satisfied on preliminary assessment that the matter should be
disposed of by the Board, then the Board shall follow the procedure, as far as may be, for
2 of 1974. trial in summons case under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973:
Provided that the order of the Board to dispose of the matter shall be applealable under
sub-section (2) of section 101:
Provided further that the assessment under this section shall be completed within the
period specified in section 14.
16. (1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall Review of
review the pendency of cases of the Board once in every three months, and shall direct the pendency of
inquiry.
Board to increase the frequency of its sittings or may recommend the constitution of additional
Boards.
(2) The number of cases pending before the Board, duration of such pendency,
nature of pendency and reasons thereof shall be reviewed in every six months by a high
level committee consisting of the Executive Chairperson of the State Legal Services
Authority, who shall be the Chairperson, the Home Secretary, the Secretary responsible for
the implementation of this Act in the State and a representative from a voluntary or non-
governmental organisation to be nominated by the Chairperson.
(3) The information of such pendency shall also be furnished by the Board to the
Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and the District Magistrate
on quarterly basis in such form as may be prescribed by the State Government.
17. (1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that the child brought before it has not Orders
committed any offence, then notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law regarding a
child not
for the time being in force, the Board shall pass order to that effect.
found to be in
conflict with
(2) In case it appears to the Board that the child referred to in sub-section (1) is in
law.
need of care and protection, it may refer the child to the Committee with appropriate
directions.
18. (1) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a child irrespective of age has Orders
committed a petty offence, or a serious offence, or a child below the age of sixteen years has regarding
child found to
committed a heinous offence, then, notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any
be in conflict
other law for the time being in force, and based on the nature of offence, specific need for
with law.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
supervision or intervention, circumstances as brought out in the social investigation report
and past conduct of the child, the Board may, if it so thinks fit,—
(a) allow the child to go home after advice or admonition by following appropriate
inquiry and counselling to such child and to his parents or the guardian;
(b) direct the child to participate in group counselling and similar activities;
(c) order the child to perform community service under the supervision of an
organisation or institution, or a specified person, persons or group of persons identified
by the Board;
(d) order the child or parents or the guardian of the child to pay fine:
Provided that, in case the child is working, it may be ensured that the provisions
of any labour law for the time being in force are not violated;
(e) direct the child to be released on probation of good conduct and placed
under the care of any parent, guardian or fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit
person executing a bond, with or without surety, as the Board may require, for the
good behaviour and child’s well-being for any period not exceeding three years;
(f) direct the child to be released on probation of good conduct and placed under
the care and supervision of any fit facility for ensuring the good behaviour and child’s
well-being for any period not exceeding three years;
(g) direct the child to be sent to a special home, for such period, not exceeding
three years, as it thinks fit, for providing reformative services including education, skill
development, counselling, behaviour modification therapy, and psychiatric support
during the period of stay in the special home:
Provided that if the conduct and behaviour of the child has been such that, it
would not be in the child’s interest, or in the interest of other children housed in a
special home, the Board may send such child to the place of safety.
(2) If an order is passed under clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section (1), the Board may, in
addition pass orders to—
(i) attend school; or
(ii) attend a vocational training centre; or
(iii) attend a therapeutic centre; or
(iv) prohibit the child from visiting, frequenting or appearing at a specified place;
or
(v) undergo a de-addiction programme.
(3) Where the Board after preliminary assessment under section 15 pass an order that
there is a need for trial of the said child as an adult, then the Board may order transfer of the
trial of the case to the Children’s Court having jurisdiction to try such offences.
Powers of 19. (1) After the receipt of preliminary assessment from the Board under section 15,
Children’s the Children´s Court may decide that—
Court.
(i) there is a need for trial of the child as an adult as per the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and pass appropriate orders after trial subject to the 2 of 1974.
provisions of this section and section 21, considering the special needs of the child,
the tenets of fair trial and maintaining a child friendly atmosphere;
(ii) there is no need for trial of the child as an adult and may conduct an inquiry
as a Board and pass appropriate orders in accordance with the provisions of
section 18.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15
(2) The Children’s Court shall ensure that the final order, with regard to a child in
conflict with law, shall include an individual care plan for the rehabilitation of child, including
follow up by the probation officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker.
(3) The Children’s Court shall ensure that the child who is found to be in conflict with
law is sent to a place of safety till he attains the age of twenty-one years and thereafter, the
person shall be transferred to a jail:
Provided that the reformative services including educational services, skill
development, alternative therapy such as counselling, behaviour modification therapy, and
psychiatric support shall be provided to the child during the period of his stay in the place
of safety.
(4) The Children’s Court shall ensure that there is a periodic follow up report every
year by the probation officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker, as
required, to evaluate the progress of the child in the place of safety and to ensure that there
is no ill-treatment to the child in any form.
(5) The reports under sub-section (4) shall be forwarded to the Children´s Court for
record and follow up, as may be required.
20. (1) When the child in conflict with the law attains the age of twenty-one years and Child attained
is yet to complete the term of stay, the Children´s Court shall provide for a follow up by the age of
probation officer or the District Child Protection Unit or a social worker or by itself, as twenty-one
years and yet
required, to evaluate if such child has undergone reformative changes and if the child can
to complete
be a contributing member of the society and for this purpose the progress records of the prescribed
child under sub-section (4) of section 19, along with evaluation of relevant experts are to be term of stay
taken into consideration. in place of
safety.
(2) After the completion of the procedure specified under sub-section (1), the
Children’s Court may—
(i) decide to release the child on such conditions as it deems fit which includes
appointment of a monitoring authority for the remainder of the prescribed term of stay;
(ii) decide that the child shall complete the remainder of his term in a jail:
Provided that each State Government shall maintain a list of monitoring authorities
and monitoring procedures as may be prescribed.
21. No child in conflict with law shall be sentenced to death or for life imprisonment Order that
without the possibility of release, for any such offence, either under the provisions of this may not be
passed against
45 of 1860. Act or under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code or any other law for the time being in
a child in
force.
conflict with
law.
22. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Code of Criminal Proceeding
under Chapter
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973, or any preventive detention law for the time being in force, no proceeding
VIII of the
shall be instituted and no order shall be passed against any child under Chapter VIII of the
Code of
said Code. Criminal
Procedure not
to apply
against child.
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 223 of the Code of Criminal No joint
proceedings
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the time being in force, there shall be no joint
of child in
proceedings of a child alleged to be in conflict with law, with a person who is not a child.
conflict with
law and
(2) If during the inquiry by the Board or by the Children’s Court, the person alleged to
person not a
be in conflict with law is found that he is not a child, such person shall not be tried along child.
with a child.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
Removal of 24. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
disqualification force, a child who has committed an offence and has been dealt with under the provisions
on the findings
of this Act shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attached to a conviction of an offence
of an offence.
under such law:
Provided that in case of a child who has completed or is above the age of sixteen
years and is found to be in conflict with law by the Children’s Court under clause (i) of
sub-section (1) of section 19, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply.
(2) The Board shall make an order directing the Police, or by the Children’s court to its
own registry that the relevant records of such conviction shall be destroyed after the expiry of
the period of appeal or, as the case may be, a reasonable period as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case of a heinous offence where the child is found to be in
conflict with law under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 19, the relevant records
of conviction of such child shall be retained by the Children’s Court.
Special 25. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all proceedings in respect of a
provision in child alleged or found to be in conflict with law pending before any Board or court on the
respect of
date of commencement of this Act, shall be continued in that Board or court as if this Act
pending cases.
had not been enacted.
Provision 26. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the
with respect time being in force, any police officer may take charge of a child in conflict with law who has
of run away
run away from a special home or an observation home or a place of safety or from the care
child in
of a person or institution under whom the child was placed under this Act.
conflict with
law. (2) The child referred to in sub-section (1) shall be produced, within twenty-four
hours, preferably before the Board which passed the original order in respect of that child,
if possible, or to the nearest Board where the child is found.
(3) The Board shall ascertain the reasons for the child having run away and pass
appropriate orders for the child to be sent back either to the institution or person from
whose custody the child had run away or any other similar place or person, as the Board
may deem fit:
Provided that the Board may also give additional directions regarding any special
steps that may be deemed necessary, for the best interest of the child.
(4) No additional proceeding shall be instituted in respect of such child.
CHAPTER V
CHILD WELFARE COMMITTEE
Child Welfare 27. (1) The State Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette constitute
Committee. for every district, one or more Child Welfare Committees for exercising the powers and to
discharge the duties conferred on such Committees in relation to children in need of care
and protection under this Act and ensure that induction training and sensitisation of all
members of the committee is provided within two months from the date of notification.
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairperson, and four other members as the State
Government may think fit to appoint, of whom atleast one shall be a woman and another, an
expert on the matters concerning children.
(3) The District Child Protection Unit shall provide a Secretary and other staff that
may be required for secretarial support to the Committee for its effective functioning.
(4) No person shall be appointed as a member of the Committee unless such person
has been actively involved in health, education or welfare activities pertaining to children
for atleast seven years or is a practicing professional with a degree in child psychology or
psychiatry or law or social work or sociology or human development.
(5) No person shall be appointed as a member unless he possesses such other
qualifications as may be prescribed.
(6) No person shall be appointed for a period of more than three years as a member of
the Committee.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17
(7) The appointment of any member of the Committee shall be terminated by the State
Government after making an inquiry, if—
(i) he has been found guilty of misuse of power vested on him under this Act;
(ii) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and such
conviction has not been reversed or he has not been granted full pardon in respect of
such offence;
(iii) he fails to attend the proceedings of the Committee consecutively for three
months without any valid reason or he fails to attend less than three-fourths of the
sittings in a year.
(8) The District Magistrate shall conduct a quarterly review of the functioning of the
Committee.
(9) The Committee shall function as a Bench and shall have the powers conferred by
2 of 1974. the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 on a Metropolitan Magistrate or, as the case may be,
a Judicial Magistrate of First Class.
(10) The District Magistrate shall be the grievances redressal authority for the Child
Welfare Committee and anyone connected with the child, may file a petition before the
District Magistrate, who shall consider and pass appropriate orders.
28. (1) The Committee shall meet at least twenty days in a month and shall observe Procedure in
such rules and procedures with regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may relation to
Committee.
be prescribed.
(2) A visit to an existing child care institution by the Committee, to check its functioning
and well being of children shall be considered as a sitting of the Committee.
(3) A child in need of care and protection may be produced before an individual
member of the Committee for being placed in a Children’s Home or fit person when the
Committee is not in session.
(4) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members of the Committee at
the time of taking any decision, the opinion of the majority shall prevail but where there is
no such majority, the opinion of the Chairperson shall prevail.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Committee may act,
notwithstanding the absence of any member of the Committee, and no order made by the
Committee shall be invalid by reason only of the absence of any member during any stage
of the proceeding:
Provided that there shall be at least three members present at the time of final disposal
of the case.
29. (1) The Committee shall have the authority to dispose of cases for the care, Powers of
protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of children in need of care and Committee.
protection, as well as to provide for their basic needs and protection.
(2) Where a Committee has been constituted for any area, such Committee shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, but save as
otherwise expressly provided in this Act, have the power to deal exclusively with all
proceedings under this Act relating to children in need of care and protection.
30. The functions and responsibilities of the Committee shall include— Functions and
responsibilities
(i) taking cognizance of and receiving the children produced before it;
of
(ii) conducting inquiry on all issues relating to and affecting the safety and well- Committee.
being of the children under this Act;
(iii) directing the Child Welfare Officers or probation officers or District Child
Protection Unit or non-governmental organisations to conduct social investigation
and submit a report before the Committee;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(iv) conducting inquiry for declaring fit persons for care of children in need of
care and protection;
(v) directing placement of a child in foster care;
(vi) ensuring care, protection, appropriate rehabilitation or restoration of children
in need of care and protection, based on the child’s individual care plan and passing
necessary directions to parents or guardians or fit persons or children’s homes or fit
facility in this regard;
(vii) selecting registered institution for placement of each child requiring
institutional support, based on the child’s age, gender, disability and needs and
keeping in mind the available capacity of the institution;
(viii) conducting at least two inspection visits per month of residential facilities
for children in need of care and protection and recommending action for improvement
in quality of services to the District Child Protection Unit and the State Government;
(ix) certifying the execution of the surrender deed by the parents and ensuring
that they are given time to reconsider their decision as well as making all efforts to
keep the family together;
(x) ensuring that all efforts are made for restoration of abandoned or lost children
to their families following due process, as may be prescribed;
(xi) declaration of orphan, abandoned and surrendered child as legally free for
adoption after due inquiry;
(xii) taking suo motu cognizance of cases and reaching out to children in need
of care and protection, who are not produced before the Committee, provided that
such decision is taken by at least three members;
(xiii) taking action for rehabilitation of sexually abused children who are reported
as children in need of care and protection to the Committee by Special Juvenile Police
Unit or local police, as the case may be, under the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012; 32 of 2012.
(xiv) dealing with cases referred by the Board under sub-section (2) of
section 17;
(xv) co-ordinate with the police, labour department and other agencies involved
in the care and protection of children with support of the District Child Protection
Unit or the State Government;
(xvi) in case of a complaint of abuse of a child in any child care institution, the
Committee shall conduct an inquiry and give directions to the police or the District
Child Protection Unit or labour department or childline services, as the case may be;
(xvii) accessing appropriate legal services for children;
(xviii) such other functions and responsibilities, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER VI
PROCEDURE IN RELATION TO CHILDREN IN NEED OF CARE AND PROTECTION
Production 31. (1) Any child in need of care and protection may be produced before the Committee
before by any of the following persons, namely:—
Committee.
(i) any police officer or special juvenile police unit or a designated Child Welfare
Police Officer or any officer of District Child Protection Unit or inspector appointed
under any labour law for the time being in force;
(ii) any public servant;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19
(iii) Childline Services or any voluntary or non-governmental organisation or
any agency as may be recognised by the State Government;
(iv) Child Welfare Officer or probation officer;
(v) any social worker or a public spirited citizen;
(vi) by the child himself; or
(vii) any nurse, doctor or management of a nursing home, hospital or maternity
home:
Provided that the child shall be produced before the Committee without any loss of
time but within a period of twenty-four hours excluding the time necessary for the journey.
(2) The State Government may make rules consistent with this Act, to provide for the
manner of submitting the report to the Committee and the manner of sending and entrusting
the child to children’s home or fit facility or fit person, as the case may be, during the period
of the inquiry.
32. (1) Any individual or a police officer or any functionary of any organisation or a Mandatory
nursing home or hospital or maternity home, who or which finds and takes charge, or is reporting
regarding a
handed over a child who appears or claims to be abandoned or lost, or a child who appears
child found
or claims to be an orphan without family support, shall within twenty-four hours (excluding
separated
the time necessary for the journey), give information to the Childline Services or the nearest from
police station or to a Child Welfare Committee or to the District Child Protection Unit, or guardian.
hand over the child to a child care institution registered under this Act, as the case may be.
(2) The information regarding a child referred to in sub-section (1) shall be mandatorily
uploaded on a portal as may be specified by the Central Government or the Committee or the
District Child Protection Unit or the child care institution, as the case may be.
33. If information regarding a child as required under section 32 is not given within Offence of
non-
the period specified in the said section, then, such act shall be regarded as an offence.
reporting.
34. Any person who has committed an offence under section 33 shall be liable to Penalty for
imprisonment up to six months or fine of ten thousand rupees or both. non-
reporting.
35. (1) A parent or guardian, who for physical, emotional and social factors beyond Surrender of
their control, wishes to surrender a child, shall produce the child before the Committee. children.
(2) If, after prescribed process of inquiry and counselling, the Committee is satisfied,
a surrender deed shall be executed by the parent or guardian, as the case may be, before the
Committee.
(3) The parents or guardian who surrendered the child, shall be given two months
time to reconsider their decision and in the intervening period the Committee shall either
allow, after due inquiry, the child to be with the parents or guardian under supervision, or
place the child in a Specialised Adoption Agency, if he or she is below six years of age, or a
children’s home if he is above six years.
36. (1) On production of a child or receipt of a report under section 31, the Committee Inquiry.
shall hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed and the Committee, on its own or
on the report from any person or agency as specified in sub-section (2) of section 31, may
pass an order to send the child to the children’s home or a fit facility or fit person, and for
speedy social investigation by a social worker or Child Welfare Officer or Child Welfare
Police Officer:
Provided that all children below six years of age, who are orphan, surrendered or
appear to be abandoned shall be placed in a Specialised Adoption Agency, where available.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(2) The social investigation shall be completed within fifteen days so as to enable the
Committee to pass final order within four months of first production of the child:
Provided that for orphan, abandoned or surrendered children, the time for completion
of inquiry shall be as specified in section 38.
(3) After the completion of the inquiry, if Committee is of the opinion that the said
child has no family or ostensible support or is in continued need of care and protection, it
may send the child to a Specialised Adoption Agency if the child is below six years of age,
children’s home or to a fit facility or person or foster family, till suitable means of rehabilitation
are found for the child, as may be prescribed, or till the child attains the age of eighteen
years:
Provided that the situation of the child placed in a children’s home or with a fit facility
or person or a foster family, shall be reviewed by the Committee, as may be prescribed.
(4) The Committee shall submit a quarterly report on the nature of disposal of cases
and pendency of cases to the District Magistrate in the manner as may be prescribed, for
review of pendency of cases.
(5) After review under sub-section (4), the District Magistrate shall direct the
Committee to take necessary remedial measures to address the pendency, if necessary and
send a report of such reviews to the State Government, who may cause the constitution of
additional Committees, if required:
Provided that if the pendency of cases continues to be unaddressed by the Committee
even after three months of receiving such directions, the State Government shall terminate
the said Committee and shall constitute a new Committee.
(6) In anticipation of termination of the Committee and in order that no time is lost in
constituting a new Committee, the State Government shall maintain a standing panel of
eligible persons to be appointed as members of the Committee.
(7) In case of any delay in the constitution of a new Committee under sub-section (5),
the Child Welfare Committee of a nearby district shall assume responsibility in the intervening
period.
Orders passed 37.(1) The Committee on being satisfied through the inquiry that the child before the
regarding a
Committee is a child in need of care and protection, may, on consideration of Social
child in need
of care and Investigation Report submitted by Child Welfare Officer and taking into account the child’s
protection. wishes in case the child is sufficiently mature to take a view, pass one or more of the
following orders, namely:—
(a) declaration that a child is in need of care and protection;
(b) restoration of the child to parents or guardian or family with or without
supervision of Child Welfare Officer or designated social worker;
(c) placement of the child in Children’s Home or fit facility or Specialised Adoption
Agency for the purpose of adoption for long term or temporary care, keeping in mind
the capacity of the institution for housing such children, either after reaching the
conclusion that the family of the child cannot be traced or even if traced, restoration
of the child to the family is not in the best interest of the child;
(d) placement of the child with fit person for long term or temporary care;
(e) foster care orders under section 44;
(f) sponsorship orders under section 45;
(g) directions to persons or institutions or facilities in whose care the child is
placed, regarding care, protection and rehabilitation of the child, including directions
relating to immediate shelter and services such as medical attention, psychiatric and
psychological support including need-based counselling, occupational therapy or

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21
behaviour modification therapy, skill training, legal aid, educational services, and
other developmental activities, as required, as well as follow-up and coordination
with the District Child Protection Unit or State Government and other agencies;
(h) declaration that the child is legally free for adoption under section 38.
(2) The Committee may also pass orders for —
(i) declaration of fit persons for foster care;
(ii) getting after care support under section 46 of the Act; or
(iii) any other order related to any other function as may be prescribed.
38. (1) In case of orphan and abandoned child, the Committee shall make all efforts for Procedure for
tracing the parents or guardians of the child and on completion of such inquiry, if it is declaring a
established that the child is either an orphan having no one to take care, or abandoned, the child legally
free for
Committee shall declare the child legally free for adoption:
adoption.
Provided that such declaration shall be made within a period of two months from the
date of production of the child, for children who are up to two years of age and within four
months for children above two years of age:
Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in this regard in any other
law for the time being in force, no first information report shall be registered against any
biological parent in the process of inquiry relating to an abandoned or surrendered child
under this Act.
(2) In case of surrendered child, the institution where the child has been placed by the
Committee on an application for surrender, shall bring the case before the Committee
immediately on completion of the period specified in section 35, for declaring the child
legally free for adoption.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
a child of a mentally retarded parents or a unwanted child of victim of sexual assault, such
child may be declared free for adoption by the Committee, by following the procedure under
this Act.
(4) The decision to declare an orphan, abandoned or surrendered child as legally free
for adoption shall be taken by at least three members of the Committee.
(5) The Committee shall inform the State Agency and the Authority regarding the
number of children declared as legally free for adoption and number of cases pending for
decision in the manner as may be prescribed, every month.
CHAPTER VII
REHABILITATION AND SOCIAL RE-INTEGRATION
39. (1) The process of rehabilitation and social integration of children under this Act Process of
shall be undertaken, based on the individual care plan of the child, preferably through rehabilitation
and social re-
family based care such as by restoration to family or guardian with or without supervision
integration.
or sponsorship, or adoption or foster care:
Provided that all efforts shall be made to keep siblings placed in institutional or non-
institutional care, together, unless it is in their best interest not to be kept together.
(2) For children in conflict with law the process of rehabilitation and social integration
shall be undertaken in the observation homes, if the child is not released on bail or in special
homes or place of safety or fit facility or with a fit person, if placed there by the order of the
Board.
(3) The children in need of care and protection who are not placed in families for any
reason may be placed in an institution registered for such children under this Act or with a

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
fit person or a fit facility, on a temporary or long-term basis, and the process of rehabilitation
and social integration shall be undertaken wherever the child is so placed.
(4) The Children in need of care and protection who are leaving institutional care or
children in conflict with law leaving special homes or place of safety on attaining eighteen
years of age, may be provided financial support as specified in section 46, to help them to
re-integrate into the mainstream of the society.
Restoration 40. (1) The restoration and protection of a child shall be the prime objective of any
of child in Children’s Home, Specialised Adoption Agency or open shelter.
need of care
and (2) The Children’s Home, Specialised Adoption Agency or an open shelter, as the
protection.
case may be, shall take such steps as are considered necessary for the restoration and
protection of a child deprived of his family environment temporarily or permanently where
such child is under their care and protection.
(3) The Committee shall have the powers to restore any child in need of care and
protection to his parents, guardian or fit person, as the case may be, after determining the
suitability of the parents or guardian or fit person to take care of the child, and give them
suitable directions.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “restoration and protection of a
child” means restoration to—
(a) parents;
(b) adoptive parents;
(c) foster parents;
(d) guardian; or
(e) fit person.
Registration 41. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
of child care force, all institutions, whether run by a State Government or by voluntary or non-governmental
institutions.
organisations, which are meant, either wholly or partially, for housing children in need of
care and protection or children in conflict with law, shall, be registered under this Act in
such manner as may be prescribed, within a period of six months from the date of
commencement of this Act, regardless of whether they are receiving grants from the Central
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government or not:
Provided that the institutions having valid registration under the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 on the date of commencement of this Act shall 56 of 2000.
be deemed to have been registered under this Act.
(2) At the time of registration under this section, the State Government shall determine
and record the capacity and purpose of the institution and shall register the institution as a
Children’s Home or open shelter or Specialised Adoption Agency or observation home or
special home or place of safety, as the case may be.
(3) On receipt of application for registration under sub-section (1), from an existing or
new institution housing children in need of care and protection of children in conflict with
law, the State Government may grant provisional registration, within one month from the
date of receipt of application, for a maximum period of six months, in order to bring such
institution under the purview of this Act, and shall determine the capacity of the Home
which shall be mentioned in the registration certificate:
Provided that if the said institution does not fulfill the prescribed criteria for registration,
within the period specified in sub-section (1), the provisional registration shall stand cancelled
and the provisions of sub-section (5) shall apply.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23
(4) If the State Government does not issue a provisional registration certificate within
one month from the date of application, the proof of receipt of application for registration
shall be treated as provisional registration to run an institution for a maximum period of six
months.
(5) If the application for registration is not disposed of within six months by any
officer or officers of any State Government, it shall be regarded as dereliction of duty on
their part by their higher controlling authority and appropriate departmental proceedings
shall be initiated.
(6) The period of registration of an institution shall be five years, and it shall be
subject to renewal in every five years.
(7) The State Government may, after following the procedure as may be prescribed,
cancel or withhold registration, as the case may be, of such institutions which fail to
provide rehabilitation and reintegration services as specified in section 53 and till such time
that the registration of an institution is renewed or granted, the State Government shall
manage the institution.
(8) Any child care institution registered under this section shall be duty bound to
admit children, subject to the capacity of the institution, as directed by the Committee,
whether they are receiving grants from the Central Government or, as the case may be, the
State Government or not.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the inspection committee appointed under section 54, shall have the powers to inspect any
institution housing children, even if not registered under this Act to determine whether
such institution is housing children in need of care and protection.
42. Any person, or persons, in-charge of an institution housing children in need of Penalty for
care and protection and children in conflict with law, who fails to comply with the provisions non-
registration of
of sub-section (1) of section 41, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to
child care
one year or a fine of not less than one lakh rupees or both:
institutions.
Provided that every thirty days delay in applying for registration shall be considered
as a separate offence.
43. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain, by itself or through Open shelter.
voluntary or non-governmental organisations, as many open shelters as may be required,
and such open shelters shall be registered as such, in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The open shelters referred to in sub-section (1) shall function as a community
based facility for children in need of residential support, on short term basis, with the
objective of protecting them from abuse or weaning them, or keeping them, away from a life
on the streets.
(3) The open shelters shall send every month information, in the manner as may be
prescribed, regarding children availing the services of the shelter, to the District Child
Protection Unit and the Committee.
44. (1) The children in need of care and protection may be placed in foster care, Foster care.
including group foster care for their care and protection through orders of the Committee,
after following the procedure as may be prescribed in this regard, in a family which does not
include the child’s biological or adoptive parents or in an unrelated family recognised as
suitable for the purpose by the State Government, for a short or extended period of time.
(2) The selection of the foster family shall be based on family’s ability, intent, capacity
and prior experience of taking care of children.
(3) All efforts shall be made to keep siblings together in foster families, unless it is in
their best interest not to be kept together.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(4) The State Government, after taking into account the number of children, shall
provide monthly funding for such foster care through District Child Protection Unit after
following the procedure, as may be prescribed, for inspection to ensure well being of the
children.
(5) In cases where children have been placed in foster care for the reason that their
parents have been found to be unfit or incapacitated by the Committee, the child’s parents
may visit the child in the foster family at regular intervals, unless the Committee feels that
such visits are not in the best interest of the child, for reasons to be recorded therefor; and
eventually, the child may return to the parent’s homes once the parents are determined by
the Committee to be fit to take care of the child.
(6) The foster family shall be responsible for providing education, health and nutrition
to the child and shall ensure the overall well being of the child in such manner, as may be
prescribed.
(7) The State Government may make rules for the purpose of defining the procedure,
criteria and the manner in which foster care services shall be provided for children.
(8) The inspection of foster families shall be conducted every month by the Committee
in the form as may be prescribed to check the well-being of the child and whenever a foster
family is found lacking in taking care of the child, the child shall be removed from that foster
family and shifted to another foster family as the Committee may deem fit.
(9) No child regarded as adoptable by the Committee shall be given for long-term
foster care.
Sponsorship. 45. (1) The State Government shall make rules for the purpose of undertaking various
programmes of sponsorship of children, such as individual to individual sponsorship,
group sponsorship or community sponsorship.
(2) The criteria for sponsorship shall include,—
(i) where mother is a widow or divorced or abandoned by family;
(ii) where children are orphan and are living with the extended family;
(iii) where parents are victims of life threatening disease;
(iv) where parents are incapacitated due to accident and unable to take care of
children both financially and physically.
(3) The duration of sponsorship shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The sponsorship programme may provide supplementary support to families, to
Children’s Homes and to special homes to meet medical, nutritional, educational and other
needs of the children, with a view to improving their quality of life.
After care of 46. Any child leaving a child care institution on completion of eighteen years of age
children
may be provided with financial support in order to facilitate child’s re-integration into the
leaving child
mainstream of the society in the manner as may be prescribed.
care
institution.
Observation 47. (1) The State Government shall establish and maintain in every district or a group
homes. of districts, either by itself, or through voluntary or non-governmental organisations,
observation homes, which shall be registered under section 41 of this Act, for temporary
reception, care and rehabilitation of any child alleged to be in conflict with law, during the
pendency of any inquiry under this Act.
(2) Where the State Government is of the opinion that any registered institution other
than a home established or maintained under sub-section (1), is fit for the temporary reception
of such child alleged to be in conflict with law during the pendency of any inquiry under
this Act, it may register such institution as an observation home for the purposes of this
Act.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25
(3) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, provide for the
management and monitoring of observation homes, including the standards and various
types of services to be provided by them for rehabilitation and social integration of a child
alleged to be in conflict with law and the circumstances under which, and the manner in
which, the registration of an observation home may be granted or withdrawn.
(4) Every child alleged to be in conflict with law who is not placed under the charge of
parent or guardian and is sent to an observation home shall be segregated according to the
child’s age and gender, after giving due consideration to physical and mental status of the
child and degree of the offence committed.
48. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain either by itself or through Special
voluntary or non-governmental organisations, special homes, which shall be registered as homes.
such, in the manner as may be prescribed, in every district or a group of districts, as may be
required for rehabilitation of those children in conflict with law who are found to have
committed an offence and who are placed there by an order of the Juvenile Justice Board
made under section 18.
(2) The State Government may, by rules, provide for the management and monitoring
of special homes, including the standards and various types of services to be provided by
them which are necessary for social re-integration of a child, and the circumstances under
which, and the manner in which, the registration of a special home may be granted or
withdrawn.
(3) The rules made under sub-section (2) may also provide for the segregation and
separation of children found to be in conflict with law on the basis of age, gender, the nature
of offence committed by them and the child’s mental and physical status.
49. (1) The State Government shall set up atleast one place of safety in a State Place of
registered under section 41, so as to place a person above the age of eighteen years or child safety.
in conflict with law, who is between the age of sixteen to eighteen years and is accused of
or convicted for committing a heinous offence.
(2) Every place of safety shall have separate arrangement and facilities for stay of
such children or persons during the process of inquiry and children or persons convicted
of committing an offence.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, prescribe the types of places that can be
designated as place of safety under sub-section (1) and the facilities and services that may
be provided therein.
50. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain, in every district or group of Children’s
districts, either by itself or through voluntary or non-governmental organisations, Children’s Home.
Homes, which shall be registered as such, for the placement of children in need of care and
protection for their care, treatment, education, training, development and rehabilitation.
(2) The State Government shall designate any Children’s Home as a home fit for
children with special needs delivering specialised services, depending on requirement.
(3) The State Government may, by rules, provide for the monitoring and management
of Children’s Homes including the standards and the nature of services to be provided by
them, based on individual care plans for each child.
51. (1) The Board or the Committee shall recognise a facility being run by a Fit facility.
Governmental organisation or a voluntary or non-governmental organisation registered
under any law for the time being in force to be fit to temporarily take the responsibility of a
child for a specific purpose after due inquiry regarding the suitability of the facility and the
organisation to take care of the child in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board or the Committee may withdraw the recognition under sub-section (1)
for reasons to be recorded in writing.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
Fit person. 52. (1) The Board or the Committee shall, after due verification of credentials, recognise
any person fit to temporarily receive a child for care, protection and treatment of such child
for a specified period and in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Board or Committee, as the case may be, may withdraw the recognition
granted under sub-section (1) for reasons to be recorded in writing.
53. (1) The services that shall be provided, by the institutions registered under this
Rehabilitation
and re- Act in the process of rehabilitation and re-integration of children, shall be in such manner as
integration may be prescribed, which may include—
services in
institutions (i) basic requirements such as food, shelter, clothing and medical attention as
registered per the prescribed standards;
under this Act
and (ii) equipment such as wheel-chairs, prosthetic devices, hearing aids, braille
management
kits, or any other suitable aids and appliances as required, for children with special
thereof.
needs;
(iii) appropriate education, including supplementary education, special
education, and appropriate education for children with special needs:
Provided that for children between the age of six to fourteen years, the
provisions of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 shall 35 of 2009.
apply;
(iv) skill development;
(v) occupational therapy and life skill education;
(vi) mental health interventions, including counselling specific to the need of
the child;
(vii) recreational activities including sports and cultural activities;
(viii) legal aid where required;
(ix) referral services for education, vocational training, de-addiction, treatment
of diseases where required;
(x) case management including preparation and follow up of individual care
plan;
(xi) birth registration;
(xii) assistance for obtaining the proof of identity, where required; and
(xiii) any other service that may reasonably be provided in order to ensure the
well-being of the child, either directly by the State Government, registered or fit
individuals or institutions or through referral services.
(2) Every institution shall have a Management Committee, to be set up in a manner as
may be prescribed, to manage the institution and monitor the progress of every child.
(3) The officer in-charge of every institution, housing children above six years of age,
shall facilitate setting up of children’s committees for participating in such activities as may
be prescribed, for the safety and well-being of children in the institution.
Inspection of 54. (1) The State Government shall appoint inspection committees for the State and
institutions district, as the case may be, for all institutions registered or recognised to be fit under this
registered
Act for such period and for such purposes, as may be prescribed.
under this Act.
(2) Such inspection committees shall mandatorily conduct visits to all facilities housing
children in the area allocated, at least once in three months in a team of not less than three
members, of whom at least one shall be a woman and one shall be a medical officer, and
submit reports of the findings of such visits within a week of their visit, to the District Child
Protection Units or State Government, as the case may be, for further action.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27
(3) On the submission of the report by the inspection committee within a week of the
inspection, appropriate action shall be taken within a month by the District Child Protection
Unit or the State Government and a compliance report shall be submitted to the State
Government.
55. (1) The Central Government or State Government may independently evaluate the Evaluation of
functioning of the Board, Committee, special juvenile police units, registered institutions, functioning of
or recognised fit facilities and persons, at such period and through such persons or structures.
institutions as may be prescribed by that Government.
(2) In case such independent evaluation is conducted by both the Governments, the
evaluation made by the Central Government shall prevail.
CHAPTER VIII
ADOPTION
56. (1) Adoption shall be resorted to for ensuring right to family for the orphan, Adoption.
abandoned and surrendered children, as per the provisions of this Act, the rules made
thereunder and the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(2) Adoption of a child from a relative by another relative, irrespective of their religion, can
be made as per the provisions of this Act and the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(3) Nothing in this Act shall apply to the adoption of children made under the provisions
78 of 1956. of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956.
(4) All inter-country adoptions shall be done only as per the provisions of this Act
and the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(5) Any person, who takes or sends a child to a foreign country or takes part in any
arrangement for transferring the care and custody of a child to another person in a foreign
country without a valid order from the Court, shall be punishable as per the provisions of
section 80.
57. (1) The prospective adoptive parents shall be physically fit, financially sound, Eligibility of
mentally alert and highly motivated to adopt a child for providing a good upbringing to him. prospective
adoptive
(2) In case of a couple, the consent of both the spouses for the adoption shall be parents.
required.
(3) A single or divorced person can also adopt, subject to fulfilment of the criteria and
in accordance with the provisions of adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) A single male is not eligible to adopt a girl child.
(5) Any other criteria that may be specified in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
58. (1) Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India, irrespective of their Procedure for
religion, if interested to adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child, may apply for adoption by
the same to a Specialised Adoption Agency, in the manner as provided in the adoption Indian
prospective
regulations framed by the Authority.
adoptive
(2) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall prepare the home study report of the parents living
in India.
prospective adoptive parents and upon finding them eligible, will refer a child declared
legally free for adoption to them along with the child study report and medical report of the
child, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(3) On the receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive
parents along with the child study report and medical report of the child signed by such
parents, the Specialised Adoption Agency shall give the child in pre-adoption foster care
and file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the Specialised Adoption
Agency shall send immediately the same to the prospective adoptive parents.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(5) The progress and wellbeing of the child in the adoptive family shall be followed up
and ascertained in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
Procedure for 59. (1) If an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child could not be placed with an
inter-country Indian or non-resident Indian prospective adoptive parent despite the joint effort of the
adoption of
Specialised Adoption Agency and State Agency within sixty days from the date the child
an orphan or
abandoned or has been declared legally free for adoption, such child shall be free for inter-country adoption:
surrendered
Provided that children with physical and mental disability, siblings and children above
child.
five years of age may be given preference over other children for such inter-country adoption,
in accordance with the adoption regulations, as may be framed by the Authority.
(2) An eligible non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or persons of Indian
origin shall be given priority in inter-country adoption of Indian children.
(3) A non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or person of Indian origin or a
foreigner, who are prospective adoptive parents living abroad, irrespective of their religion,
if interested to adopt an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, may apply
for the same to an authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority or a concerned
Government department in their country of habitual residence, as the case may be, in the
manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or a concerned
Government department, as the case may be, shall prepare the home study report of such
prospective adoptive parents and upon finding them eligible, will sponsor their application
to Authority for adoption of a child from India, in the manner as provided in the adoption
regulations framed by the Authority.
(5) On the receipt of the application of such prospective adoptive parents, the Authority
shall examine and if it finds the applicants suitable, then, it will refer the application to one of
the Specialised Adoption Agencies, where children legally free for adoption are available.
(6) The Specialised Adoption Agency will match a child with such prospective adoptive
parents and send the child study report and medical report of the child to such parents, who
in turn may accept the child and return the child study and medical report duly signed by
them to the said agency.
(7) On receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective adoptive parents,
the Specialised Adoption Agency shall file an application in the court for obtaining the
adoption order, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.
(8) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the specialised adoption
agency shall send immediately the same to Authority, State Agency and to the prospective
adoptive parents, and obtain a passport for the child.
(9) The Authority shall intimate about the adoption to the immigration authorities of
India and the receiving country of the child.
(10) The prospective adoptive parents shall receive the child in person from the
specialised adoption agency as soon as the passport and visa are issued to the child.
(11) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or the concerned
Government department, as the case may be, shall ensure the submission of progress
reports about the child in the adoptive family and will be responsible for making alternative
arrangement in the case of any disruption, in consultation with Authority and concerned
Indian diplomatic mission, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by
the Authority.
(12) A foreigner or a person of Indian origin or an overseas citizen of India, who has
habitual residence in India, if interested to adopt a child from India, may apply to Authority for
the same along with a no objection certificate from the diplomatic mission of his country in
India, for further necessary actions as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29
60. (1) A relative living abroad, who intends to adopt a child from his relative in India Procedure for
shall obtain an order from the court and apply for no objection certificate from Authority, in inter-country
relative
the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
adoption.
(2) The Authority shall on receipt of the order under sub-section (1) and the application
from either the biological parents or from the adoptive parents, issue no objection certificate
under intimation to the immigration authority of India and of the receiving country of the
child.
(3) The adoptive parents shall, after receiving no objection certificate under
sub-section (2), receive the child from the biological parents and shall facilitate the contact
of the adopted child with his siblings and biological parents from time to time.
61. (1) Before issuing an adoption order, the court shall satisfy itself that –– Court
procedure and
(a) the adoption is for the welfare of the child; (b) due consideration is given to
penalty
the wishes of the child having regard to the age and understanding of the child; and
against
(c) that neither the prospective adoptive parents has given or agreed to give nor the payment in
specialised adoption agency or the parent or guardian of the child in case of relative consideration
of adoption.
adoption has received or agreed to receive any payment or reward in consideration of
the adoption, except as permitted under the adoption regulations framed by the
Authority towards the adoption fees or service charge or child care corpus.
(2) The adoption proceedings shall be held in camera and the case shall be disposed
of by the court within a period of two months from the date of filing.
62. (1) The documentation and other procedural requirements, not expressly provided Additional
in this Act with regard to the adoption of an orphan, abandoned and surrendered child by procedural
requirements
Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India, or by non-resident Indian or overseas
and
citizen of India or person of Indian origin or foreigner prospective adoptive parents, shall be
documentation.
as per the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(2) The specialised adoption agency shall ensure that the adoption case of prospective
adoptive parents is disposed of within four months from the date of receipt of application
and the authorised foreign adoption agency, Authority and State Agency shall track the
progress of the adoption case and intervene wherever necessary, so as to ensure that the
time line is adhered to.
63. A child in respect of whom an adoption order is issued by the court, shall become Effect of
the child of the adoptive parents, and the adoptive parents shall become the parents of the adoption.
child as if the child had been born to the adoptive parents, for all purposes, including
intestacy, with effect from the date on which the adoption order takes effect, and on and
from such date all the ties of the child in the family of his or her birth shall stand severed and
replaced by those created by the adoption order in the adoptive family:
Provided that any property which has vested in the adopted child immediately before
the date on which the adoption order takes effect shall continue to vest in the adopted child
subject to the obligations, if any, attached to the ownership of such property including the
obligations, if any, to maintain the relatives in the biological family.
64. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, Reporting of
information regarding all adoption orders issued by the concerned courts, shall be forwarded adoption.
to Authority on monthly basis in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority, so as to enable Authority to maintain the data on adoption.
65. (1) The State Government shall recognise one or more institutions or organisations Specialised
in each district as a Specialised Adoption Agency, in such manner as may be provided in the Adoption
adoption regulations framed by the Authority, for the rehabilitation of orphan, abandoned Agencies.
or surrendered children, through adoption and non-institutional care.
(2) The State Agency shall furnish the name, address and contact details of the
Specialised Adoption Agencies along with copies of certificate or letter of recognition or
renewal to Authority, as soon as the recognition or renewal is granted to such agencies.
(3) The State Government shall get every Specialised Adoption Agency inspected at
least once in a year and take necessary remedial measures, if required.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(4) In case any Specialised Adoption Agency is in default in taking necessary steps
on its part as provided in this Act or in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority,
for getting an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child legally free for adoption from the
Committee or in completing the home study report of the prospective adoptive parents or in
obtaining adoption order from the court within the stipulated time, such Specialised Adoption
Agency shall be punishable with a fine which may extend up to fifty thousand rupees and
in case of repeated default, the recognition of the Specialised Adoption Agency shall be
withdrawn by the State Government.
Adoption of 66. (1) All the institutions registered under this Act, which may not have been
children recognised as Specialised Adoption Agencies, shall also ensure that all orphan or abandoned
residing in or surrendered children under their care are reported, produced and declared legally free for
institutions
adoption, by the Committee as per the provisions of section 38.
not registered
as adoption
(2) All institutions referred to in sub-section (1) shall develop formal linkages with
agencies.
nearby Specialised Adoption Agency and shall furnish details of the children declared
legally free for adoption to that Specialised Adoption Agency along with all relevant records
in the manner as may be prescribed, for the placement of such children in adoption.
(3) If any such institution contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2), it shall be liable to fine of fifty thousand rupees for each instance to be
imposed by the registering authority and it may also attract de-recognition in the event of
persistent flouting of such provisions.
State 67. (1) The State Government shall set up a State Adoption Resource Agency for
Adoption dealing with adoptions and related matters in the State under the guidance of Authority.
Resource
Agency. (2) The State Agency, wherever already exists, shall be deemed to be set up under this
Act.
Central 68. The Central Adoption Resource Agency existing before the commencement of
Adoption this Act, shall be deemed to have been constituted as the Central Adoption Resource
Resource
Authority under this Act to perform the following functions, namely:—
Authority.
(a) to promote in-country adoptions and to facilitate inter-State adoptions in
co-ordination with State Agency;
(b) to regulate inter-country adoptions;
(c) to frame regulations on adoption and related matters from time to time as
may be necessary;
(d) to carry out the functions of the Central Authority under the Hague
Convention on Protection of Children and Cooperation in respect of Inter-country
Adoption;
(e) any other function as may be prescribed.
Steering 69. (1) The Authority shall have a Steering Committee with following members :
Committee of
Authority. (a) Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India,
who shall be the Chairperson—ex officio;
(b) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of
India, dealing with Authority—ex officio;
(c) Joint Secretary, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of
India, dealing with Finance—ex officio;
(d) one State Adoption Resource Agency and two Specialised Adoption
Agencies;
(e) one adoptive parent and one adoptee;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31
(f) one advocate or a professor having at least ten years of experience in family
law;
(g) Member-Secretary, who shall also be Chief Executive Officer of the
organisation.
(2) Criteria for the selection or nomination of the Members mentioned at (d) to (f), their
tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Steering Committee shall have the following functions, namely:—
(a) to oversee the functioning of Authority and review its working from time to
time so that it operates in most effective manner;
(b) to approve the annual budget, annual accounts and audit reports as well as
the action plan and annual report of Authority;
(c) to adopt the recruitment rules, service rules, financial rules of Authority as
well as the other regulations for the exercise of the administrative and programmatic
powers within the organisation, with the prior approval of the Central Government;
(d) any other function that may be vested with it by the Central Government
from time to time.
(4) The Steering Committee shall meet once in a month in the manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Authority shall function from its headquarter and through its regional offices
as may be set up as per its functional necessity.
70. (1) For the efficient performance of its functions, Authority shall have the following Powers of
powers, namely:— Authority.
(a) to issue instructions to any Specialised Adoption Agency or a Children
Home or any child care institution housing any orphan, abandoned or surrendered
child, any State Agency or any authorised foreign adoption agency and such directions
shall be complied by such agencies;
(b) recommending to the concerned Government or Authority to take appropriate
action against any official or functionary or institution under its administrative control,
in case of persistent non-compliance of the instructions issued by it;
(c) forwarding any case of persistent non-compliance of its instructions by any
official or functionary or institution to a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the
same and the Magistrate to whom any such case is forwarded shall proceed to hear
the same as if the case has been forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code of
2 of 1974. Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(d) any other power that may be vested with it by the Central Government.
(2) In case of any difference of opinion in an adoption case, including the eligibility of
prospective adoptive parents or of a child to be adopted, the decision of Authority shall
prevail.
71. (1) The Authority shall submit an annual report to the Central Government in such Annual
manner as may be prescribed. Report of
Authority.
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report of Authority to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
72. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by Grants by
law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants such sums of money as the Central Central
Government.
Government may think fit for being utilised for performing the functions of Authority under
this Act.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(2) The Authority may spend such sums of money as it thinks fit for performing the
functions, as prescribed under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure
payable out of the grants referred to in sub-section (1).
Accounts and 73. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
audit of prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central
Authority. Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and
Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall, have the
same rights and privileges and the Authority in connection with the audit of Government
accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of
Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General
or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon
shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Authority.
(5) The Central Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be
after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
OTHER OFFENCES AGAINST CHILDREN
Prohibition 74. (1) No report in any newspaper, magazine, news-sheet or audio-visual media or
on disclosure other forms of communication regarding any inquiry or investigation or judicial procedure,
of identity of shall disclose the name, address or school or any other particular, which may lead to the
children.
identification of a child in conflict with law or a child in need of care and protection or a child
victim or witness of a crime, involved in such matter, under any other law for the time being
in force, nor shall the picture of any such child be published:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Board or Committee, as the
case may be, holding the inquiry may permit such disclosure, if in its opinion such disclosure
is in the best interest of the child.
(2) The Police shall not disclose any record of the child for the purpose of character
certificate or otherwise in cases where the case has been closed or disposed of.
(3) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or fine which may extend to
two lakh rupees or both.
Punishment 75. Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over, a child, assaults, abandons,
for cruelty to abuses, exposes or wilfully neglects the child or causes or procures the child to be assaulted,
child. abandoned, abused, exposed or neglected in a manner likely to cause such child unnecessary
mental or physical suffering, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years or with fine of one lakh rupees or with both:
Provided that in case it is found that such abandonment of the child by the biological
parents is due to circumstances beyond their control, it shall be presumed that such abandonment
is not wilful and the penal provisions of this section shall not apply in such cases:
Provided further that if such offence is committed by any person employed by or
managing an organisation, which is entrusted with the care and protection of the child, he
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment which may extend up to five years, and fine
which may extend up to five lakhs rupees:
Provided also that on account of the aforesaid cruelty, if the child is physically
incapacitated or develops a mental illness or is rendered mentally unfit to perform regular

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33
tasks or has risk to life or limb, such person shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment,
not less than three years but which may be extended up to ten years and shall also be liable
to fine of five lakhs rupees.
76. (1) Whoever employs or uses any child for the purpose of begging or causes any Employment
child to beg shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years of child for
and shall also be liable to fine of one lakh rupees: begging.
Provided that, if for the purpose of begging, the person amputates or maims the child,
he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than seven years
which may extend up to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine of five lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over the child, abets the
commission of an offence under sub-section (1), shall be punishable with the same
punishment as provided for in sub-section (1) and such person shall be considered to be
unfit under sub-clause (v) of clause (14) of section 2:
Provided that the said child, shall not be considered a child in conflict with law under
any circumstances, and shall be removed from the charge or control of such guardian or
custodian and produced before the Committee for appropriate rehabilitation.
77. Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any child any intoxicating liquor or any Penalty for
narcotic drug or tobacco products or psychotropic substance, except on the order of a duly giving
qualified medical practitioner, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term intoxicating
liquor or
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to a fine which may extend up to
narcotic drug or
one lakh rupees. psychotropic
substance to a
child.
78. Whoever uses a child, for vending, peddling, carrying, supplying or smuggling Using a child
any intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, shall be liable for rigorous for vending,
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to a fine up peddling,
carrying,
to one lakh rupees.
supplying or
smuggling any
intoxicating
liquor,
narcotic drug
or
psychotropic
substance.
79. Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, Exploitation
whoever ostensibly engages a child and keeps him in bondage for the purpose of employment of a child
or withholds his earnings or uses such earning for his own purposes shall be punishable employee.
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable
to fine of one lakh rupees.
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this section, the term “employment” shall also
include selling goods and services, and entertainment in public places for economic gain.
80. If any person or organisation offers or gives or receives, any orphan, abandoned Punitive
or surrendered child, for the purpose of adoption without following the provisions or measures for
procedures as provided in this Act, such person or organisation shall be punishable with adoption
without
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend upto three years, or with fine
following
of one lakh rupees, or with both: prescribed
procedures.
Provided in case where the offence is committed by a recognised adoption agency, in
addition to the above punishment awarded to the persons in-charge of, and responsible for
the conduct of the day-to-day affairs of the adoption agency, the registration of such
agency under section 41 and its recognition under section 65 shall also be withdrawn for a
minimum period of one year.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
Sale and 81. Any person who sells or buys a child for any purpose shall be punishable with
procurement rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to
of children for
fine of one lakh rupees:
any purpose.
Provided that where such offence is committed by a person having actual charge of
the child, including employees of a hospital or nursing home or maternity home, the term of
imprisonment shall not be less than three years and may extend up to seven years.
Corporal 82. (1) Any person in-charge of or employed in a child care institution, who
punishment. subjects a child to corporal punishment with the aim of disciplining the child, shall be
liable, on the first conviction, to a fine of ten thousand rupees and for every subsequent
offence, shall be liable for imprisonment which may extend to three months or fine or
with both.
(2) If a person employed in an institution referred to in sub-section (1), is convicted of
an offence under that sub-section, such person shall also be liable for dismissal from
service, and shall also be debarred from working directly with children thereafter.
(3) In case, where any corporal punishment is reported in an institution referred to in
sub-section (1) and the management of such institution does not cooperate with any inquiry
or comply with the orders of the Committee or the Board or court or State Government, the
person in-charge of the management of the institution shall be liable for punishment with
imprisonment for a term not less than three years and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees.
Use of child 83. (1) Any non-State, self-styled militant group or outfit declared as such by the
by militant Central Government, if recruits or uses any child for any purpose, shall be liable for rigorous
groups or
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine of
other adults.
five lakh rupees.
(2) Any adult or an adult group uses children for illegal activities either individually or
as a gang shall be liable for rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years and shall also be liable to fine of five lakh rupees.
Kidnapping 84. For the purposes of this Act, the provisions of sections 359 to 369 of the Indian
and abduction Penal Code, shall mutatis mutandis apply to a child or a minor who is under the age of
45 of 1860.
of child.
eighteen years and all the provisions shall be construed accordingly.
Offences 85. Whoever commits any of the offences referred to in this Chapter on any child who
committed on is disabled as so certified by a medical practitioner, then, such person shall be liable to twice
disabled
the penalty provided for such offence.
children.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this Act, the term “disability” shall have the
same meaning as assigned to it under clause (i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995. 1 of 1996.
Classification 86. (1) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term
of offences more than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable, non-bailable and triable by
and designated
a Children’s Court.
court.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term of
three years and above, but not more than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable,
non-bailable and triable by a Magistrate of First Class.
(3) Where an offence, under this Act, is punishable with imprisonment for less than
three years or with fine only, then, such offence shall be non-cognizable, bailable and triable
by any Magistrate.
Abetment. 87. Whoever abets any offence under this Act, if the act abetted is committed in
consequence of the abetment, shall be punished with the punishment provided for that
offence.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35
Explanation.— An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment,
when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy
or with the aid, which constitutes the abetment.
88. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under this Act and Alternative
also under any other law for the time being in force, then, notwithstanding anything contained punishment.
in any such law, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable for punishment
under such law which provides for punishment which is greater in degree.
89. Any child who commits any offence under this Chapter shall be considered as a Offence
child in conflict with law under this Act. committed by
child under
CHAPTER X this Chapter.
MISCELLANEOUS
90. The Committee or the Board, as the case may be, before which a child is brought Attendance of
under any of the provisions of this Act, may, whenever it so thinks fit, require any parent or parent or
guardian of
guardian having the actual charge of the child to be present at any proceeding in respect of
child.
that child.
91. (1) If, at any stage during the course of an inquiry, the Committee or the Board is Dispensing
satisfied that the attendance of the child is not essential for the purpose of inquiry, the with
attendance of
Committee or the Board, as the case may be, shall dispense with the attendance of a child
child.
and limit the same for the purpose of recording the statement and subsequently, the inquiry
shall continue even in the absence of the child concerned, unless ordered otherwise by the
Committee or the Board.
(2) Where the attendance of a child is required before the Board or the Committee,
such child shall be entitled to travel reimbursement for self and one escort accompanying
the child as per actual expenditure incurred, by the Board, or the Committee or the District
Child Protection Unit, as the case may be.
92. When a child, who has been brought before the Committee or the Board, is found Placement of
to be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical treatment or physical or mental a child
suffering
complaint that will respond to treatment, the Committee or the Board, as the case may be,
from disease
may send the child to any place recognised as a fit facility as prescribed for such period as requiring
it may think necessary for the required treatment. prolonged
medical
treatment in
an approved
place.
93. (1) Where it appears to the Committee or the Board that any child kept in a special Transfer of a
home or an observation home or a Children’s Home or in an institution in pursuance of the child who is
mentally ill or
provisions of this Act, is a mentally ill person or addicted to alcohol or other drugs which
addicted to
lead to behavioural changes in a person, the Committee or the Board , may order removal of
alcohol or
such child to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in accordance with the other drugs.
14 of 1987. provisions of the Mental Health Act, 1987 or the rules made thereunder.
(2) In case the child had been removed to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing
home under sub-section (1), the Committee or the Board may, on the basis of the advice
given in the certificate of discharge of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home,
order to remove such child to an Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts or similar
centres maintained by the State Government for mentally ill persons (including the persons
addicted to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance) and such removal shall be only
for the period required for the inpatient treatment of such child.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,—
(a) “Integrated Rehabilitation Centre for Addicts” shall have the meaning
assigned to it under the scheme called “Central Sector Scheme of Assistance for

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse and for Social Defence
Services” framed by the Central Government in the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment or any other corresponding scheme for the time being in force;
(b) “mentally ill person” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (l)
of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987; 14 of 1987.
(c) “psychiatric hospital” or “psychiatric nursing home” shall have the same
meaning assigned to it in clause (q) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987. 14 of 1987.
Presumption 94. (1) Where, it is obvious to the Committee or the Board, based on the appearance
and of the person brought before it under any of the provisions of this Act (other than for the
determination
purpose of giving evidence) that the said person is a child, the Committee or the Board shall
of age.
record such observation stating the age of the child as nearly as may be and proceed with
the inquiry under section 14 or section 36, as the case may be, without waiting for further
confirmation of the age.
(2) In case, the Committee or the Board has reasonable grounds for doubt regarding
whether the person brought before it is a child or not, the Committee or the Board, as the
case may be, shall undertake the process of age determination, by seeking evidence by
obtaining —
(i) the date of birth certificate from the school, or the matriculation or equivalent
certificate from the concerned examination Board, if available; and in the absence
thereof;
(ii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a
panchayat;
(iii) and only in the absence of (i) and (ii) above, age shall be determined by an
ossification test or any other latest medical age determination test conducted on the
orders of the Committee or the Board:
Provided such age determination test conducted on the order of the Committee or the
Board shall be completed within fifteen days from the date of such order.
(3) The age recorded by the Committee or the Board to be the age of person so
brought before it shall, for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be the true age of that
person.
Transfer of a 95. (1) If during the inquiry it is found that a child hails from a place outside the
child to place jurisdiction, the Board or Committee, as the case may be, shall, if satisfied after due inquiry
of residence. that it is in the best interest of the child and after due consultation with the Committee or the
Board of the child’s home district, order the transfer of the child, as soon as possible, to the
said Committee or the Board, along with relevant documents and following such procedure
as may be prescribed:
Provided that such transfer can be made in case of a child in conflict with law, only
after the inquiry has been completed and final order passed by the Board:
Provided further that in case of inter-State transfer, the child shall be, if convenient,
handed over to the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, of the home district of the
child, or to the Committee or the Board in the capital city of the home State.
(2) Once the decision to transfer is finalised, the Committee or Board, as the case may
be, shall give an escort order to the Special Juvenile Police Unit to escort the child, within
fifteen days of receiving such order:
Provided that a girl child shall be accompanied by a woman police officer:
Provided further that where a Special Juvenile Police Unit is not available, the
Committee or Board, as the case may be, shall direct the institution where the child is

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37
temporarily staying or District Child Protection Unit, to provide an escort to accompany the
child during travel.
(3) The State Government shall make rules to provide for travelling allowance to the
escorting staff for the child, which shall be paid in advance.
(4) The Committee or the Board, as the case may be, receiving the transferred child
will process for restoration or rehabilitation or social re-integration, as provided in this Act.
96. (1) The State Government may at any time, on the recommendation of a Committee Transfer of
or Board, as the case may be, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and keeping child between
Children’s
the best interest of the child in mind, order the child’s transfer from any Children’s Home or
Homes, or
special home or fit facility or fit person, to a home or facility, within the State with prior special homes
intimation to the concerned Committee or the Board: or fit facility
or fit person
Provided that for transfer of a child between similar home or facility or person within in different
the same district, the Committee or Board, as the case may be, of the said district shall be parts of India.
competent to issue such an order.
(2) If transfer is being ordered by a State Government to an institution outside the
State, this shall be done only in consultation with the concerned State Government.
(3) The total period of stay of the child in a Children’s Home or a special home shall
not be increased by such transfer.
(4) Orders passed under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be deemed to be operative for
the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, of the area to which the child is sent.
97. (1) When a child is kept in a Children’s Home or special home, on a report of a Release of a
probation officer or social worker or of Government or a voluntary or non-governmental child from an
institution.
organisation, as the case may be, the Committee or the Board may consider, the release of
such child, either absolutely or on such conditions as it may think fit to impose, permitting
the child to live with parents or guardian or under the supervision of any authorised person
named in the order, willing to receive and take charge, educate and train the child, for some
useful trade or calling or to look after the child for rehabilitation:
Provided that if a child who has been released conditionally under this section, or the
person under whose supervision the child has been placed, fails to fulfil such conditions,
the Board or Committee may, if necessary, cause the child to be taken charge of and to be
placed back in the concerned home.
(2) If the child has been released on a temporary basis, the time during which the child
is not present in the concerned home in pursuance of the permission granted under
sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be part of the time for which the child is liable to be kept
in the children or special home:
Provided that in case of a child in conflict with law fails to fulfil the conditions set by
the Board as mentioned in sub-section (1), the time for which he is still liable to be kept in
the institution shall be extended by the Board for a period equivalent to the time which
lapses due to such failure.
98. (1) The Committee or the Board, as the case may be, may permit leave of absence Leave of
to any child, to allow him, on special occasions like examination, marriage of relatives, death absence to a
child placed
of kith or kin or accident or serious illness of parent or any emergency of like nature, under
in an
supervision, for a period generally not exceeding seven days in one instance, excluding the
institution.
time taken in journey.
(2) The time during which a child is absent from an institution where he is placed, in
pursuance of such permission granted under this section, shall be deemed to be part of the
time for which he is liable to be kept in the Children’s Home or special home.
(3) If a child refuses, or has failed to return to the Children’s Home or special home, as
the case may be, on the leave period being exhausted or permission being revoked or

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
forfeited, the Board or Committee may, if necessary, cause him to be taken charge of and to
be taken back to the concerned home:
Provided that when a child in conflict with law has failed to return to the special home
on the leave period being exhausted or on permission being revoked or forfeited, the time
for which he is still liable to be kept in the institution shall be extended by the Board for a
period equivalent to the time which lapses due to such failure.
Reports to be 99. (1) All reports related to the child and considered by the Committee or the Board
treated as shall be treated as confidential:
confidential.
Provided that the Committee or the Board, as the case may be, may, if it so thinks fit,
communicate the substance thereof to another Committee or Board or to the child or to the
child’s parent or guardian, and may give such Committee or the Board or the child or parent
or guardian, an opportunity of producing evidence as may be relevant to the matter stated
in the report.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the victim shall not be denied
access to their case record, orders and relevant papers.
Protection of 100. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central
action taken Government, or the State Government or any person acting under the directions of the
in good faith.
Central Government or State Government, as the case may be, in respect of anything which
is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or
regulations made thereunder.
Appeals. 101. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any person aggrieved by an order made
by the Committee or the Board under this Act may, within thirty days from the date of such
order, prefer an appeal to the Children’s Court, except for decisions by the Committee
related to Foster Care and Sponsorship After Care for which the appeal shall lie with the
District Magistrate:
Provided that the Court of Sessions, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be,
may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time and such
appeal shall be decided within a period of thirty days.
(2) An appeal shall lie against an order of the Board passed after making the preliminary
assessment into a heinous offence under section 15 of the Act, before the Court of Sessions
and the Court may, while deciding the appeal, take the assistance of experienced psychologists
and medical specialists other than those whose assistance has been obtained by the Board
in passing the order under the said section.
(3) No appeal shall lie from,—
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect of a child alleged to have
committed an offence other than the heinous offence by a child who has completed or
is above the age of sixteen years; or
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of finding that a person is not a
child in need of care and protection.
(4) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court of Session, passed in appeal
under this section.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Children’s Court may file an appeal
before the High Court in accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974.
Revision. 102. The High Court may, at any time, either on its own motion or on an application
received in this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in which any Committee or
Board or Children’s Court, or Court has passed an order, for the purpose of satisfying itself
as to the legality or propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto
as it thinks fit:
Provided that the High Court shall not pass an order under this section prejudicial to
any person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39
103. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, a Committee or a Board Procedure in
while holding any inquiry under any of the provisions of this Act, shall follow such procedure inquiries,
appeals and
as may be prescribed and subject thereto, shall follow, as far as may be, the procedure laid
revision
2 of 1974. down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for trial of summons cases. proceedings.
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, the procedure to be
followed in hearing appeals or revision proceedings under this Act shall be, as far as
2 of 1974. practicable, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
104. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions for appeal and revision contained in this Power of the
Act, the Committee or the Board may, on an application received in this behalf, amend any Committee
or the Board
orders passed by itself, as to the institution to which a child is to be sent or as to the person
to amend its
under whose care or supervision a child is to be placed under this Act:
own orders.
Provided that during the course of hearing for amending any such orders, there shall
be at least two members of the Board of which one shall be the Principal Magistrate and at
least three members of the Committee and all persons concerned, or their authorised
representatives, whose views shall be heard by the Committee or the Board, as the case may
be, before the said orders are amended.
(2) Clerical mistakes in orders passed by the Committee or the Board or errors arising
therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any time, be corrected by the Committee
or the Board, as the case may be, either on its own motion or on an application received in
this behalf.
105. (1) The State Government may create a fund in such name as it thinks fit for the Juvenile
welfare and rehabilitation of the children dealt with under this Act. justice fund.
(2) There shall be credited to the fund such voluntary donations, contributions or
subscriptions as may be made by any individual or organisation.
(3) The fund created under sub-section (1) shall be administered by the Department
of the State Government implementing this Act in such manner and for such purposes as
may be prescribed.
106. Every State Government shall constitute a Child Protection Society for the State State Child
and Child Protection Unit for every District, consisting of such officers and other employees Protection
Society and
as may be appointed by that Government, to take up matters relating to children with a view
District Child
to ensure the implementation of this Act, including the establishment and maintenance of Protection
institutions under this Act, notification of competent authorities in relation to the children Unit.
and their rehabilitation and co-ordination with various official and non-official agencies
concerned and to discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.
107. (1) In every police station, at least one officer, not below the rank of assistant Child Welfare
sub-inspector, with aptitude, appropriate training and orientation may be designated as the Police Officer
and Special
child welfare police officer to exclusively deal with children either as victims or perpetrators,
Juvenile
in co-ordination with the police, voluntary and non-governmental organisations.
Police Unit.
(2) To co-ordinate all functions of police related to children, the State Government
shall constitute Special Juvenile Police Units in each district and city, headed by a police
officer not below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or above and consisting of
all police officers designated under sub-section (1) and two social workers having experience
of working in the field of child welfare, of whom one shall be a woman.
(3) All police officers of the Special Juvenile Police Units shall be provided special
training, especially at induction as child welfare police officer, to enable them to perform
their functions more effectively.
(4) Special Juvenile Police Unit also includes Railway police dealing with children.
108. The Central Government and every State Government, shall take necessary Public
measures to ensure that— awareness on
provisions of
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through media including Act.
television, radio and print media at regular intervals so as to make the general public,
children and their parents or guardians aware of such provisions;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(b) the officers of the Central Government, State Government and other concerned,
persons are imparted periodic training on the matters relating to the implementation of
the provisions of this Act.
Monitoring of 109. (1) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted under
implementation section 3, or as the case may be, the State Commission for Protection of Child Rights
of Act.
constituted under section 17 (herein referred to as the National Commission or the State
Commission, as the case may be), of the Commissions for Protection of Child rights
Act, 2005, shall, in addition to the functions assigned to them under the said Act, also 4 of 2006.
monitor the implementation of the provisions of this Act, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, shall, while
inquiring into any matter relating to any offence under this Act, have the same powers as are
vested in the National Commission or the State Commission under the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005. 4 of 2006.
(3) The National Commission or, as the case may be, the State Commission, shall also
include its activities under this section, in the annual report referred to in section 16 of the
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005. 4 of 2006.
Power to 110. (1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
make rules. to carry out the purposes of this Act:
Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules in respect of all or any
of the matters with respect to which the State Government is required to make rules and
where any such model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they shall
apply to the State mutatis mutandis until the rules in respect of that matter are made by the
State Government and while making any such rules, they conform to such model rules.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :—
(i) manner of inquiry in case of a missing or run away child or whose parents
cannot be found under sub-clause (vii) of clause (14) of section 2;
(ii) responsibilities of the Child Welfare Officer attached to a Children’s Home
under clause (18) of section 2;
(iii) qualifications of the members of the Board under sub-section (2) of
section 4;
(iv) induction training and sensitisation of all members of the Board under
sub-section (5) of section 4;
(v) term of office of the members of the Board and the manner in which such
member may resign under sub-section (6) of section 4;
(vi) time of the meetings of the Board and the rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at its meeting under sub-section (1) of section 7;
(vii) qualifications, experience and payment of fees of an interpreter or translator
under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 8;
(viii) any other function of the Board under clause (n) of sub-section (3) of
section 8;
(ix) persons through whom any child alleged to be in conflict with law may be
produced before the Board and the manner in which such a child may be sent to an
observation home or place of safety under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(x) manner in which a person apprehended and not released on bail by the
officer-in-charge of the police station may be kept in an observation home until such
person is brought before a Board under sub-section (2) of section 12;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41
(xi) format for information on pendency in the Board to the Chief Judicial
Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and District Magistrate on quarterly
basis under sub-section (3) of section 16;
(xii) monitoring procedures and list of monitoring authorities under sub-section
(2) of section 20;
(xiii) manner in which the relevant records of the child may be destroyed by the
Board, police or the court under sub-section (2) of section 24;
(xiv) qualifications of the members of the Child Welfare Committee under sub-
section (5) of section 27;
(xv) rules and procedures with regard to transaction of business at the meetings
of the Child Welfare Committee under sub-section (1) of section 28;
(xvi) process of restoration of abandoned or lost children to their families under
clause (x) of section 30;
(xvii) manner of submitting the report to the Committee and the manner of
sending and entrusting the child to Children’s Home or fit facility or fit person under
sub-section (2) of section 31;
(xviii) manner of holding an inquiry by the Child Welfare Committee under sub-
section (1) of section 36;
(xix) manner in which a child may be sent to a Specialised Adoption Agency if
the child is below six years of age, Children’s Home or to a fit facility or person or foster
family, till suitable means of rehabilitation are found for the child including manner in
which situation of the child placed in a Children’s Home or with a fit facility or person
or foster family, may be reviewed by the Committee under sub-section (3) of section 36;
(xx) manner in which a quarterly report may be submitted by the Committee to
the District Magistrate for review of pendency of cases under sub-section (4) of
section 36;
(xxi) any other order related to any other function of the Committee under
clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 37;
(xxii) information to be given every month by the Committee to State Agency
and Authority regarding number of children declared legally free for adoption and
number of cases pending under sub-section (5) of section 38;
(xxiii) manner in which all institutions under this Act shall be registered under
sub-section (1) of section 41;
(xxiv) procedure for cancelling or withholding registration of an institution that
fails to provide rehabilitation and re-integration services under sub-section (7) of
section 41;
(xxv) manner in which information shall be sent every month by the open shelter
to the District Child Protection Unit and Committee under sub-section (3) of section
43;
(xxvi) procedure for placing children in foster care including group foster care
under sub-section (1) of section 44;
(xxvii) procedure for inspection of children in foster care under sub-section (4)
of section 44;
(xxviii) manner in which foster family shall provide education, health and
nutrition to the child under sub-section (6) of section 44;
(xxix) procedure and criteria in which foster care services shall be provided to
children under sub-section (7) of section 44;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(xxx) format for inspection of foster families by the Committee to check the well
being of children under sub-section (8) of section 44;
(xxxi) purpose of undertaking various programmes of sponsorship of children,
such as individual to individual sponsorship, group sponsorship or community
sponsorship under sub-section (1) of section 45;
(xxxii) duration of sponsorship under sub-section (3) of section 45;
(xxxiii) manner of providing financial support to any child leaving institutional
care on completing eighteen years of age under section 46;
(xxxiv) management and monitoring of observation homes, including the
standards and various types of services to be provided by them for rehabilitation and
social integration of a child alleged to be in conflict with law and the circumstances
under which, and the manner in which, the registration of an observation home may be
granted or withdrawn under sub-section (3) of section 47;
(xxxv) management and monitoring of special homes including the standards
and various types of services to be provided to them under sub-section (2) and
sub-section (3) of section 48;
(xxxvi) monitoring and management of children’s homes including the standards
and the nature of services to be provided by them, based on individual care plans for
each child under sub-section (3) of section 50;
(xxxvii) manner in which a Board or the Committee shall recognise, a facility
being run by a Governmental organisation or a voluntary or non-governmental
organisation registered under any law for the time being in force, fit to temporarily take
the responsibility of a child for a specific purpose after due inquiry regarding the
suitability of the facility and the organisation to take care of the child under
sub-section (1) of section 51;
(xxxviii) procedure of verification of credentials, for recognising any person fit
to temporarily receive a child for care, protection and treatment of such child for a
specified period by the Board or the Committee under sub-section (1) of section 52;
(xxxix) manner in which services shall be provided by an institution under this Act
for rehabilitation and re-integration of children and standards for basic requirements
such as food, shelter, clothing and medical attention under sub-section (1) of
section 53;
(xl) manner in which Management Committee shall be set up by each institution
for management of the institution and monitoring of the progress of every child under
sub-section (2) of section 53;
(xli) activities that may be taken up by children’s committees under sub-section
(3) of section 53;
(xlii) appointment of inspection committees for all institutions registered or
recognised fit, for the State and district under sub-section (1) of section 54;
(xliii) manner in which Central Government or State Government may
independently evaluate the functioning of the Board, Committee, special juvenile police
units, registered institutions, or recognised fit facilities and persons, including the
period and through persons or institutions under sub-section (1) of section 55;
(xliv) manner in which institutions shall furnish details of children declared
legally free for adoption to the Specialised Adoption Agency under sub-section (2) of
section 66;
(xlv) any other function of the Authority under clause (e) of section 68;

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43
(xlvi) criteria for the selection or nomination of the Members of the Steering
Committee of the Authority and their tenure as well as the terms and conditions of their
appointment under sub-section (2) of section 69;
(xlvii) manner in which Steering Committee of the Authority shall meet under
sub-section (4) of section 69;
(xlviii) manner in which the Authority shall submit an annual report to the
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 71;
(xlix) functions of the Authority under sub-section (2) of section 72;
(l) manner in which the Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of
section 73;
(li) period that the Committee or Board may think necessary for the treatment of
children who are found to be suffering from a disease requiring prolonged medical
treatment or physical or mental complaint that will respond to treatment to a fit facility
under section 92;
(lii) procedure for transfer of child under sub-section (1) of section 95;
(liii) provision for travelling allowance to the escorting staff for the child under
sub-section (3) of section 95;
(liv) procedure to be followed by the Committee or a Board while holding any
inquiry, appeal or revision under sub-section (1) of section 103;
(lv) manner in which juvenile justice fund shall be administered under
sub-section (3) of section 105;
(lvi) functioning of the Child Protection Society for the State and Child Protection
Units for every district under section 106;
(lvii) to enable the National Commission, or as the case may be, the State
Commission to monitor implementation of the provisions of this Act under sub-section
(1) of section 109;
(lviii) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be,
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
56 of 2000. 111. (1) The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 is hereby Repeal and
repealed. savings.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Acts shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
this Act.
112. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Power to
Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove remove
the difficulty: difficulties.

--- the-juvenile-justice-care-and-protection-of-children-act-2015.pdf ---
44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— SEC. 1]
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the commencement of this Act.
(2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament.
————
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI—2015.
GMGIPMRND—3980GI(S3)—02-01-2016.

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
 . ..- 33004/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
xxxGIDHxxx
..-..-.-11032020-218601
xxxGIDExxx
CG-DL-E-11032020-218601

EXTRAORDINARY
 II—  3—- (i)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
  
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
. 141]  , ,  9, 2020/  19, 1941
No. 141] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, MARCH 9, 2020/PHALGUNA 19, 1941
     
 
 , 9 , 2020
... 165()–– ,       , 2012 (2012 
32)   45            , :
1. (1)     -             ,
2020 
(2)            
2. - (1)   ,          ,-
() ''''        , 2012 (2012  32)  ;
() ''   '' ()      (    ) 
2015 (2016  2)   106           
  
() ''''       ,  ,         
 ,    , :‍           
         
() " "        ,     , 
:‍             ‍      
   :‍            
  -       :‍          
, 2016 (2016  49)   2  ()     ;
1340 GI/2020 (1)

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
() "       "        -     
                 , 
         ,       
           ;
() " "    4  - (7)         
             ,    
    -             
 ;
(2)      ,   ‍          ,    
 ,       
3.        - (1)  ,     ,    
           -     
,     -
(i)       ;       
    ;
(ii)      ;
(iii)    -1098     ;
(iv)           ,  
      
(2)      ,  ,   ,  ,  
,   ,  , ‍ ,           
‍                  
‍        
(3)           ,    , 
                        
      ‍   
(4)      , ,           
                       , 
 -,    ,             -
                  
              
(5)          -       
   ,                   , 
       
(6)                  
  , -              
           ,     
                
                
 
4.           - (1)        (   
    ""   )        19  - (1)  
            ,            
 ,              :-
(i)    ;
(ii)    ;

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  3
(iii)           ,      
(2)                  -1098 
   ,                
(3)      ,    ,     19  - (1)
                      
   ,        ,    ,    :
()   , 1973 (1974  2)   154         
      ,          ‍    154
 - (2)      :   ;
()       19  - (5)       
    ,   6  ,       
 ;
()    27            ;
()                
    ;
()     -               
                   
          ;
()     -               
    40            
           
(4)          19  - (1)      
     ‍                    
          ,          - 
   ,      -     ,       
      24          (     
""   )       ‍       19  - (5)
                  
(5) - (3)        ,       , 2015
(2016  2)   31  - (1)      ,    ,    
      ,   ,  ‍       
                 
(6) - (4)      ,         
       ‍            , : -
(i) -,     ,             , 
                
  ;
(ii)   -,             
    ;
(iii)       ,       ;
(iv)   :‍ ,   ;
(v)   ,      ;
(vi)              ; ,
(vii)              :

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
       ,               
   
(7)     -              
        ,        ,       
      
(8) ,    19  - (6)          - (5)
         ,     -       
                     
                ,     
               
(9)            ,        
         -           
  ,   ,              
                  
     ‍                   
                  
(10)           ,      
    24          
(11)     -              , 
             ,       
                   

(12)              ,        
                  
     ;         - 
     ,     ,      
 ;      :   ,   ,        
    
(13)     -             ,
   ‍      , ‍   ,     
   ,       ,      
(14)          -       
                      
       -             
24    -             
(15)     -              ,
 ,  ,           , 
      :-
(i)          ;
(ii)      ;
(iii)      ;
(iv)             ,      
  ;
(v) ‍   ;
(vi) ‍      ;

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  5
(vii)                   
     ;
(viii)   ‍   ,     ;
(ix)       ; 
(x)      
5.  ,  ,  ,     - (1)    , 
    ,  , , ,       ,
           ,  ,     
,   ,     
(2)    19  - (4)   26  - (3)  - (4)  
38   4     ‍  , ,  ,   
  ‍    :      
(3)    , ,       (1)       
  ‍ ,    - (4)  -(5)       ,
            ,      
   , ,             
    
(4) - (1)   ‍            ,
                       
    , ,                
     ,            
(5) - (1)            ,    
                    
              ‍   
(6)                 ,   
            ‍     :
          -        
                      
  
(7)  , ,  ,       - (1)  
        ,           
, 2015 (2016  2)   105              
   
(8)           ‍   , , 
,     ,           
   , 1948 (1948  11)            

(9)    19  - (1)             
  , ,  ,          ‍    
     ,    ,           
 ‍     
(10)  , ,  , ,         
   ‍            ,      
                  ,
1973 (1974  2)   282           
(11)  38    ,        ‍      
    ,     , ,  , ,    

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
       ,           ‍  
 ,       
(12)    ‍    , ,  ,    
     ,     , 1872 (1872  1)   126 
   127    
6.      - (1)    ,      
   19                    
                      
     ,     ,      ,      
24   ,                    
        :
      3,5,7,  9       ,   
       
(2) -                 
          
(3)            ,      
                        
     
(4)                   :
()      -     ,   ;
()       ‍     ()     
 ;
()            ‍  
   ()       ;
()  (     ‍  )    -      
              
      ; 
(.)     ,      ,   , 
                   

(5)                 24     
  
(6)                
       27      
(7)                 -  
            , 1971     (
   ) , 2015              
(8)    ‍                     
     
(9)   ( )           , 2016 (2016  49) 
         
7.     - (1)           
 (     ''''   )   
(2)          , 1987 (1987  39) 
     

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  7
8.   - (1)    , , ,       ,
  ,                   
    :-
(i)  357   ; ;
(ii)              ;
(iii)    (    ) , 2015 (2016  2)    

(2)                      
   
9.  - (1)  (  )            
   ,   ,   ,           
                    
   ,    ,     
(2)    ,       ‍           
,  ‍            ,       
          ,    ,        
           
(3)        1973(1974  2)   357   (2) 
(3)   ,    33   (8)        
                      
:
(i)    ,              
;
(ii)                
  ;
(iii)            ,  , 
,     ,         ;
(iv)       ,  ,  ,  ,
    ,        ;
(v)     ,   ;
(vi) ‍    -    ‍       ;
(vii) ‍        ;
(viii) ‍         ()    ;
(ix) ‍         ()    
 ;
(x)         ;
(xi)                 
 ;
(xii)              
(4)                 ,
                   ,1973  
357           ,           
             

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(5)           30          

(6)          -          
         ,                
           
10.          - (1)       
          ,         , 
             
(2)                   
   ,     
11.           - (1)        
      ,           , ,
, , -    ,    ,   , 
           ,      ,   
 ,    (cybercrime.gov.in)           
  , -               
     
(2)  - (1)   ""  ""       , 2000 
 2  - (1)   ()   ,        ‍ , 
 - (1)     ,            
   ,     , -  (cybercrime.gov.in)  
     ,      -  -   
      
(3)                 
   ‍          ‍    
(4)         -            
         
12.       - (1)    , 2005 (2006  4) 
      (    ""   )    
  (    ""   ) ,           
‍              :-
()         ;
()          ;
() - ,             
             , 
,  ,            
          39     
  ;
()                   
               
   ;
(.)        ,       
                
 ,   ,   -  -    
    
()                 

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  9
()                 
                  : -
(i)           ;
(ii) ‍                
   ;
(iii)             
          , ,
(iv)                 
      ;
()                 
             
     
(2)         ,        
   ,            
13. -                      
   , 2012       
-
                
1.      
2.          
3.    /,     :       
4.           
5.                  
      
6.     ‍                    
 ,             
7.         
8.            
9.    ,        
10.            
11. :     
12.         ‍  
13.   
14.    
15.             
  
 : (      )
 ‘– ’      
(   /- /    )
( :                 )

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
- 
    
  
1   
2     
3      
4     ,      
5 ‍   (,   ) 
  -   ,        ,  
6
-            
‍                   
7
            
‍  ,  ,  ,        
8
            ?
9 ‍    -    ‍        ?
‍    -               
10
  ?
11    ,      
 :   
[. . 30/1/2019/Cw-I]
  ‍  , ‍  
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 9th March, 2020
G.S.R. 165(E).––In exercise of the powers conferred by section 45 of the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules, namely:––
1. (1) Short title and commencement.––These rules may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Rules, 2020.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.––(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,–
(a) “Act” means the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012);
(b) “District Child Protection Unit” (DCPU) means the District Child Protection Unit established by the State
Government under section 106 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (2 of
2016);

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  11
(c) “expert” means a person trained in mental health, medicine, child development or other relevant
discipline, who may be required to facilitate communication with a child whose ability to communicate
has been affected by trauma, disability or any other vulnerability;
(d) “special educator” means a person trained in communication with children with disabilities in a way that
addresses the child’s individual abilities and needs, which include challenges with learning and
communication, emotional and behavioral issues, physical disabilities, and developmental issues.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the expression “disabilities”, shall carry the same meaning
as defined in clause (s) of section 2 of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016);
(e) “Person familiar with the manner of communication of the child” means a parent or family member of a
child or a member of child’s shared household or any person in whom the child reposes trust and
confidence, who is familiar with that child’s unique manner of communication, and whose presence may
be required for or be conducive to more effective communication with the child;
(f) “support person” means a person assigned by the Child Welfare Committee, in accordance with
sub-rule (7) of rule 4, to render assistance to the child through the process of investigation and trial, or any
other person assisting the child in the pre-trial or trial process in respect of an offence under the Act;
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in these rules but defined in the Act shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them under the Act.
3. Awareness generation and capacity building.––(1) The Central Government, or as the case may be, the State
Government shall prepare age-appropriate educational material and curriculum for children, informing them about
various aspects of personal safety, including––
(i) measures to protect their physical, and virtual identity; and to safeguard their emotional and mental
wellbeing;
(ii) prevention and protection from sexual offences;
(iii) reporting mechanisms, including Child helpline-1098 services;
(iv) inculcating gender sensitivity, gender equality and gender equity for effective prevention of offences
under the Act.
(2) Suitable material and information may be disseminated by the respective Governments in all public places such
as panchayatbhavans, community centers, schools and colleges, bus terminals, railway stations, places of
congregation, airports, taxi stands, cinema halls and such other prominent places and also be disseminated in
suitable form in virtual spaces such as internet and social media.
(3) The Central Government and every State Government shall take all suitable measures to spread awareness about
possible risks and vulnerabilities, signs of abuse, information about rights of children under the Act along with
access to support and services available for children.
(4) Any institution housing children or coming in regular contact with children including schools, creches, sports
academies or any other facility for children must ensure a police verification and background check on periodic
basis, of every staff, teaching or non-teaching, regular or contractual, or any other person being an employee of such
Institution coming in contact with the child. Such Institution shall also ensure that periodic training is organised for
sensitising them on child safety and protection.
(5) The respective Governments shall formulate a child protection policy based on the principle of zero-tolerance to
violence against children, which shall be adopted by all institutions, organizations, or any other agency working
with, or coming in contact with children.
(6) The Central Government and every State Government shall provide periodic trainings including orientation
programmes, sensitization workshops and refresher courses to all persons, whether regular or contractual, coming in
contact with the children, to sensitize them about child safety and protection and educate them regarding their
responsibility under the Act. Orientation programme and intensive courses may also be organized for police
personnel and forensic experts for building their capacities in their respective roles on a regular basis.
4. Procedure regarding care and protection of child.–– (1) Where any Special Juvenile Police Unit (hereafter
referred to as “SJPU”) or the local police receives any information under sub-section (1) of section19 of the Act
from any person including the child, the SJPU or local police receiving the report of such information shall forthwith
disclose to the person making the report, the following details:-
(i) his or her name and designation;
(ii) the address and telephone number;

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iii) the name, designation and contact details of the officer who supervises the officer receiving the
information.
(2) If any such information regarding the commission of an offence under the provisions of the Act is received by
the child helpline-1098, the child helpline shall immediately report such information to SJPU or Local Police.
(3) Where an SJPU or the local police, as the case may be, receives information in accordance with the provisions
contained under sub-section (1) of section 19 of the Act in respect of an offence that has been committed or
attempted or is likely to be committed, the authority concerned shall, where applicable, ––
(a) proceed to record and register a First Information Report as per the provisions of section154 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and furnish a copy thereof free of cost to the person making
such report, as per sub-section (2) of section154 of that Code;
(b) where the child needs emergency medical care as described under sub-section (5) of section 19 of the Act
or under these rules, arrange for the child to access such care, in accordance with rule 6;
(c) take the child to the hospital for the medical examination in accordance with section 27 of the Act;
(d) ensure that the samples collected for the purposes of the forensic tests are sent to the forensic laboratory
immediately;
(e) inform the child and child’s parent or guardian or other person in whom the child has trust and confidence
of the availability of support services including counselling, and assist them in contacting the persons who
are responsible for providing these services and relief;
(f) inform the child and child’s parent or guardian or other person in whom the child has trust and confidence
as to the right of the child to legal advice and counsel and the right to be represented by a lawyer, in
accordance with section 40 of the Act.
(4) Where the SJPU or the local police receives information under sub-section (1) of section 19 of the Act, and has a
reasonable apprehension that the offence has been committed or attempted or is likely to be committed by a person
living in the same or shared household with the child, or the child is living in a child care institution and is without
parental support, or the child is found to be without any home and parental support, the concerned SJPU, or the local
police shall produce the child before the concerned Child Welfare Committee (hereafter referred to as “CWC”)
within 24 hours of receipt of such report, together with reasons in writing as to whether the child is in need of care
and protection under sub-section (5) of section 19 of the Act, and with a request for a detailed assessment by the
CWC.
(5) Upon receipt of a report under sub-rule (3), the concerned CWC must proceed, in accordance with its powers
under sub-section (1) of section 31 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), to make a determination within
three days, either on its own or with the assistance of a social worker, as to whether the child needs to be taken out
of the custody of child’s family or shared household and placed in a children’s home or a shelter home.
(6) In making determination under sub-rule (4), the CWC shall take into account any preference or opinion
expressed by the child on the matter, together with the best interests of the child, having regard to the following
considerations, namely:––
(i) the capacity of the parents, or of either parent, or of any other person in whom the child has trust and
confidence, to provide for the immediate care and protection needs of the child, including medical needs
and counseling;
(ii) the need for the child to remain in the care of parent’s, family and extended family and to maintain a
connection with them;
(iii) the child’s age and level of maturity, gender, and social and economic background;
(iv) disability of the child, if any;
(v) any chronic illness from which a child may suffer;
(vi) any history of family violence involving the child or a family member of the child; and,
(vii) any other relevant factors that may have a bearing on the best interests of the child:
Provided that prior to making such determination, an inquiry shall be conducted in such a way that the child
is not unnecessarily exposed to injury or inconvenience.
(7) The child and child’s parent or guardian or any other person in whom the child has trust and confidence and with
whom the child has been living, who is affected by such determination, shall be informed that such determination is
being considered.

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  13
(8) The CWC, on receiving a report under sub-section (6) of section 19 of the Act or on the basis of its assessment
made under sub-rule (5), and with the consent of the child and child’s parent or guardian or other person in whom
the child has trust and confidence, may provide a support person to render assistance to the child in all possible
manner throughout the process of investigation and trial, and shall immediately inform the SJPU or Local Police
about providing a support person to the child.
(9) The support person shall at all times maintain the confidentiality of all information pertaining to the child to
which he or she has access and shall keep the child and child’s parent or guardian or other person in whom the child
has trust and confidence, informed regarding the proceedings of the case, including available assistance, judicial
procedures, and potential outcomes. The Support person shall also inform the child of the role the Support person
may play in the judicial process and ensure that any concerns that the child may have, regarding child’s safety in
relation to the accused and the manner in which the Support person would like to provide child’s testimony, are
conveyed to the relevant authorities.
(10) Where a support person has been provided to the child, the SJPU or the local police shall, within 24 hours of
making such assignment, inform the Special Court in writing.
(11) The services of the support person may be terminated by the CWC upon request by the child and child’s parent
or guardian or person in whom the child has trust and confidence, and the child requesting the termination shall not
be required to assign any reason for such request. The Special Court shall be given in writing such information.
(12) The CWC shall also Seek monthly reports from support person till the completion of trial, with respect to
condition and care of child, including the family situation focusing on the physical, emotional and mental wellbeing,
and progress towards healing from trauma; engage with medical care facilities, in coordination with the support
person, to ensure need-based continued medical support to the child, including psychological care and counseling;
and shall ensure resumption of education of the child, or continued education of the child, or shifting of the child to
a new school, if required.
(13) It shall be the responsibility of the SJPU, or the local police to keep the child and child’s parent or guardian or
other person in whom the child has trust and confidence, and where a support person has been assigned, such
person, informed about the developments, including the arrest of the accused, applications filed and other court
proceedings.
(14) SJPU or the local police shall also inform the child and child’s parents or guardian or other person in whom the
child has trust and confidence about their entitlements and services available to them under the Act or any other law
for the time being applicable as per Form-A. It shall also complete the Preliminary Assessment Report in Form B
within 24 hours of the registration of the First Information Report and submit it to the CWC.
(15) The information to be provided by the SJPU, local police, or support person, to the child and child’s parents or
guardian or other person in whom the child has trust and confidence, includes but is not limited to the following:-
(i) the availability of public and private emergency and crisis services;
(ii) the procedural steps involved in a criminal prosecution;
(iii) the availability of victim’s compensation benefits;
(iv) the status of the investigation of the crime, to the extent it is appropriate to inform the victim and to the
extent that it will not interfere with the investigation;
(v) the arrest of a suspected offender;
(vi) the filing of charges against a suspected offender;
(vii) the schedule of court proceedings that the child is either required to attend or is entitled to attend;
(viii) the bail, release or detention status of an offender or suspected offender;
(ix) the rendering of a verdict after trial; and
(x) the sentence imposed on an offender.
5. Interpreters, translators, special educators, experts and support persons.––(1) In each district, the DCPU
shall maintain a register with names, addresses and other contact details of interpreters, translators, experts, special
educators and support persons for the purposes of the Act, and this register shall be made available to the SJPU,
local police, magistrate or Special Court, as and when required.
(2) The qualifications and experience of the interpreters, translators, special educators, experts and support persons
engaged for the purposes of sub-section (4) of section 19, sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 26 and section 38 of the
Act,and rule 4 respectively shall be as indicated in these rules.

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(3) Where an interpreter, translator, or special educator is engaged, otherwise than from the list maintained by the
DCPU under sub-rule (1), the requirements prescribed under sub-rules (4) and (5) of this rule may be relaxed on
evidence of relevant experience or formal education or training or demonstrated proof of fluency in the relevant
languages by the interpreter, translator, or special educator, subject to the satisfaction of the DCPU, Special Court or
other authority concerned.
(4) Interpreters and translators engaged under sub-rule (1) should have functional familiarity with language spoken
by the child as well as the official language of the state, either by virtue of such language being child’s mother
tongue or medium of instruction at school at least up to primary school level, or by the interpreter or translator
having acquired knowledge of such language through child’s vocation, profession, or residence in the area where
that language is spoken.
(5) Sign language interpreters, special educators and experts entered in the register under sub-rule(1) should have
relevant qualifications in sign language or special education, or in the case of an expert, in the relevant discipline,
from a recognised University or an institution recognised by the Rehabilitation Council of India.
(6) Support person may be a person or organisation working in the field of child rights or child protection, or an
official of a children’s home or shelter home having custody of the child, or a person employed by the DCPU:
Provided that nothing in these rules shall prevent the child and child’s parents or guardian or other person in
whom the child has trust and confidence from seeking the assistance of any person or organisation for proceedings
under the Act.
(7) Payment for the services of an interpreter, translator, special educator, expert or support person whose name is
enrolled in the register maintained under sub-rule (1) or otherwise, shall be made by the State Government from the
Fund maintained under section 105 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015 (2 of 2016), or from other funds placed at the
disposal of the DCPU.
(8) Any interpreter, translator, special educator, expert or support person engaged for the purpose of assisting a child
under this Act, shall be paid a fee which shall be prescribed by the State Government, but which, shall not be less
than the amount prescribed for a skilled worker under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948).
(9) Any preference expressed by the child at any stage after information is received under sub-section(1) of section
19 of the Act, as to the gender of the interpreter, translator, special educator, expert or support person, may be taken
into consideration, and where necessary, more than one such person may be engaged in order to facilitate
communication with the child.
(10) The interpreter, translator, special educator, expert, support person or person familiar with the manner of
communication of the child engaged to provide services for the purposes of the Act shall be unbiased and impartial
and shall disclose any real or perceived conflict of interest and shall render a complete and accurate interpretation or
translation without any additions or omissions, in accordance with section 282 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974).
(11) In proceedings under section 38, the Special Court shall ascertain whether the child speaks the language of the
court adequately, and that the engagement of any interpreter, translator, special educator, expert, support person or
other person familiar with the manner of communication of the child, who has been engaged to facilitate
communication with the child, does not involve any conflict of interest.
(12) Any interpreter, translator, special educator, expert or support person appointed under the Act shall be bound by
the rules of confidentiality, as described under section 127 read with section 126 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872).
6. Medical aid and care.––(1) Where an officer of the SJPU, or the local police receives information under
section 19 of the Act that an offence under the Act has been committed, and is satisfied that the child against whom
an offence has been committed is in need of urgent medical care and protection, such officer, or as the case may be,
the local police shall, within 24 hours of receiving such information, arrange to take such child to the nearest
hospital or medical care facility center for emergency medical care:
Provided that where an offence has been committed under sections 3, 5, 7 or 9 of the Act, the victim shall be
referred to emergency medical care.
(2) Emergency medical care shall be rendered in such a manner as to protect the privacy of the child, and in the
presence of the parent or guardian or any other person in whom the child has trust and confidence.
(3) No medical practitioner, hospital or other medical facility center rendering emergency medical care to a child
shall demand any legal or magisterial requisition or other documentation as a pre-requisite to rendering such care.
(4) The registered medical practitioner rendering medical care shall attend to the needs of the child, including:
(a) treatment for cuts, bruises, and other injuries including genital injuries, if any;

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  15
(b) treatment for exposure to sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) including prophylaxis for identified
STDs;
(c) treatment for exposure to Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), including prophylaxis for HIV
after necessary consultation with infectious disease experts;
(d) possible pregnancy and emergency contraceptives should be discussed with the pubertal child and her
parent or any other person in whom the child has trust and confidence; and,
(e) wherever necessary, a referral or consultation for mental or psychological health needs, or other
counseling, or drug de-addiction services and programmes should be made.
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall submit the report on the condition of the child within 24 hrs to the SJPU
or Local Police.
(6) Any forensic evidence collected in the course of rendering emergency medical care must be collected in
accordance with section 27 of the Act.
(7) If the child is found to be pregnant, then the registered medical practitioner shall counsel the child, and her
parents or guardians, or support person, regarding the various lawful options available to the child as per the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 1971 and the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2015 (2
of 2016).
(8) If the child is found to have been administered any drugs or other intoxicating substances, access to drug de-
addiction programme shall be ensured.
(9) If the Child is a divyang (person with disability), suitable measure and care shall be taken as per the provisions
of The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016).
7. Legal aid and assistance.––(1) The CWC shall make a recommendation to District Legal Services Authority
(hereafter referred to as “DLSA”) for legal aid and assistance.
(2) The legal aid and assistance shall be provided to the child in accordance with the provisions of the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987).
8. Special relief.––(1) For special relief, if any, to be provided for contingencies such as food, clothes, transport
and other essential needs, CWC may recommend immediate payment of such amount as it may assess to be required
at that stage, to any of the following:-
(i) the DLSA under Section 357A; or;
(ii) the DCPU out of such funds placed at their disposal by state or;
(iii) funds maintained under section105 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,2015 (2
of 2016);
(2) Such immediate payment shall be made within a week of receipt of recommendation from the CWC.
9. Compensation.––(1) The Special Court may, in appropriate cases, on its own or on an application filed by or on
behalf of the child, pass an order for interim compensation to meet the needs of the child for relief or rehabilitation
at any stage after registration of the First Information Report. Such interim compensation paid to the child shall be
adjusted against the final compensation, if any.
(2) The Special Court may, on its own or on an application filed by or on behalf of the victim, recommend the award
of compensation where the accused is convicted, or where the case ends in acquittal or discharge, or the accused is
not traced or identified, and in the opinion of the Special Court the child has suffered loss or injury as a result of that
offence.
(3) Where the Special Court, under sub-section (8) of section 33 of the Act read with sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) makes a direction for the award of compensation
to the victim, it shall take into account all relevant factors relating to the loss or injury caused to the victim,
including the following:-
(i) type of abuse, gravity of the offence and the severity of the mental or physical harm or injury suffered by
the child;
(ii) the expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred on child’s medical treatment for physical or mental health
or on both;
(iii) loss of educational opportunity as a consequence of the offence, including absence from school due to
mental trauma, bodily injury, medical treatment, investigation and trial of the offence, or any other reason;

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(iv) loss of employment as a result of the offence, including absence from place of employment due to mental
trauma, bodily injury, medical treatment, investigation and trial of the offence, or any other reason;
(v) the relationship of the child to the offender, if any;
(vi) whether the abuse was a single isolated incidence or whether the abuse took place over a period of time;
(vii) whether the child became pregnant as a result of the offence;
(viii) whether the child contracted a sexually transmitted disease (STD) as a result of the offence;
(ix) whether the child contracted human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) as a result of the offence;
(x) any disability suffered by the child as a result of the offence;
(xi) financial condition of the child against whom the offence has been committed so as to determine such
child’s need for rehabilitation;
(xii) any other factor that the Special Court may consider to be relevant.
(4) The compensation awarded by the Special Court is to be paid by the State Government from the Victims
Compensation Fund or other scheme or fund established by it for the purposes of compensating and rehabilitating
victims under section 357A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law for the time being in force, or,
where such fund or scheme does not exist, by the State Government.
(5) The State Government shall pay the compensation ordered by the Special Court within 30 days of receipt of such
order.
(6) Nothing in these rules shall prevent a child or child’s parent or guardian or any other person in whom the child
has trust and confidence from submitting an application for seeking relief under any other rules or scheme of the
Central Government or State Government.
10. Procedure for imposition of fine and payment thereof.––(1) The CWC shall coordinate with the DLSA to
ensure that any amount of fine imposed by the Special Court under the Act which is to be paid to the victim, is in
fact paid to the child.
(2) The CWC will also facilitate any procedure for opening a bank account, arranging for identity proofs, etc., with
the assistance of DCPU and support person.
11. Reporting of pornographic material involving a child.––(1)Any person who has received any pornographic
material involving a child or any information regarding such pornographic material being stored, possessed,
distributed, circulated, transmitted, facilitated, propagated or displayed, or is likely to be distributed, facilitated or
transmitted in any manner shall report the contents to the SJPU or local police, or as the case may be, cyber-crime
portal (cybercrime.gov.in) and upon such receipt of the report, the SJPU or local police or the cyber-crime portal
take necessary action as per the directions of the Government issued from time to time.
(2) In case the “person” as mentioned in sub-rule (1) is an “intermediary” as defined in clause (w) of sub-section (1)
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act,2000, such person shall in addition to reporting, as provided under
sub-rule(1), also hand over the necessary material including the source from which such material may have
originated to the SJPU or local police, or as the case may be, cyber-crime portal (cybercrime.gov.in) and upon such
receipt of the said material, the SJPU or local police or the cyber-crime portal take necessary action as per the
directions of the Government issued from time to time.
(3) The report shall include the details of the device in which such pornographic content was noticed and the
suspected device from which such content was received including the platform on which the content was displayed.
(4) The Central Government and every State Government shall make all endeavors to create widespread awareness
about the procedures of making such reports from time to time.
12. Monitoring of implementation of the Act.––(1) The National Commission for the Protection of Child Rights
(hereafter referred to as “NCPCR”) or the State Commission for the Protection of Child Rights (hereafter referred to
as “SCPCR”), as the case may be, shall in addition to the functions assigned to them under the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006), perform the following functions for implementation of the
provisions of the Act––
(a) monitor the designation of Special Courts by State Governments;
(b) monitor the appointment of the Special Public Prosecutors by the State Governments;
(c) monitor the formulation of the guidelines described in section 39 of the Act by the State Governments,
for the use of non-governmental organisations, professionals and experts or persons having knowledge

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
[ II—  3(i)]    :  17
of psychology, social work, physical health, mental health and child development to be associated with
the pre-trial and trial stage to assist the child, and to monitor the application of these guidelines;
(d) monitor the designing and implementation of modules for training police personnel and other concerned
persons, including officers of the Centre and State Governments, for the effective discharge of their
functions under the Act;
(e) monitor and support the Central Government and State Governments for the dissemination of
information relating to the provisions of the Act through media including the television, radio and print
media at regular intervals, so as to make the general public, children as well as their parents and
guardians aware of the provisions of the Act.
(f) call for a report on any specific case of child sexual abuse falling within the jurisdiction of a CWC.
(g) collect information and data on its own or from the relevant agencies regarding reported cases of sexual
abuse and their disposal under the processes provided under the Act, including information on the
following:-
(i) number and details of offences reported under the Act;
(ii) whether the procedures prescribed under the Act and rules were followed, including those
regarding timeframes;
(iii) details of arrangements for care and protection of victims of offences under this Act, including
arrangements for emergency medical care and medical examination; and,
(iv) details regarding assessment of the need for care and protection of a child by the concerned CWC
in any specific case;
(h) use the information so collected to assess the implementation of the provisions of the Act. The report on
monitoring of the Act shall be included in a separate chapter in the annual report of the NCPCR or the
SCPCR.
(2) The concerned authorities mandated to collect data, under the Act, shall share such data with the Central
Government and every State Government, NCPCR and SCPCRs.
13. Repeal.––The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Rules, 2012 are hereby repealed, except as respects
things done or omitted to be done before such repeal.
FORM -A
Entitlement of children who have suffered sexual abuse to receive information and services
1. To receive a copy of the FIR.
2. To receive adequate security and protection by Police.
3. To receive immediate and free medical examination by civil hospital/PHC etc.
4. To receive Counseling and consultation for mental and psychological well being
5. For Recording of statement of child by woman police officer at child’s home or any other place convenient
to child
6. To be moved to a Child Care Institution where offence was at home or in a shared household, to the
custody of a person whom child reposes faith.
7. For Immediate aid and assistance on the recommendation of CWC.
8. For being kept away from accused at all times, during trial and otherwise.
9. To have an interpreter or translator, where needed.
10. To have special educator for the child or other specialized person where child is disabled.
11. For Free Legal Aid.
12. For Support Person to be appointed by Child Welfare Committee.
13. To continue with education.
14. To privacy and confidentiality.
15. For list of Important Contact No.’s including that of the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of
Police.
Duty Officer
Date: (Name & Designation to be mentioned)
I have received a copy of ‘Form-A’
(Signature of Victim/Parent/Guardian)

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(i)]
(Note :The form may be converted in local and simple Child friendly language)
FORM-B
PRELIMINARY ASSESSMENT REPORT
PARAMETERS COMMENT
1. Age of the victim
2. Relationship of child to the offender
3. Type of abuse and gravity of the offence
4. Available details and severity of mental and physical harm/injury suffered
by the child
5. Whether the child is disabled (physical, mental or intellectual)
6. Details regarding economic status of victim’s parents, total number of
child’s family members, occupation of child’s parents and monthly
family income.
7. Whether the victim has undergone or is undergoing any medical treatment
due to incident of the present case or needs medical treatment on account
of offence.
8. Whether there has been loss of educational opportunity as a consequence
of the offence, including absence from school due to mental trauma,
bodily injury, medical treatment, investigation and trial or other reason?
9. Whether the abuse was a single isolated incident or whether the abuse
took place over a period of time?
10. Whether the parents of victim are undergoing any treatment or have any
health issues?
11. Aadhar No. of the child, if available.
Date: Station House Officer
[F. No. 30/1/2019-Cw-I]
AASTHA S. KHATWANI, Jt. Secy.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
MANOJ KUMAR VERMA
D
VE
ig
R
i
M
ta
A
lly signed by MANOJ KUMAR
Date: 2020.03.11 20:24:46 +05'30'

--- pocso-rules-merged_2.pdf ---
 . ..- 33004/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
xxxGIDHxxx
..-..-.-19032020-218807
xxxGIDExxx
CG-DL-E-19032020-218807

EXTRAORDINARY
 II—  3—- (i)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
  
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
. 162]  ,  ,  19, 2020/  29, 1941
No. 162] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, MARCH 19, 2020/PHALGUNA 29, 1941
MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT
CORRIGENDUM
New Delhi, the 17th March, 2020
G.S.R. 188(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 45 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012), Ministry of Women & Child Development
vide G.S.R. 165(E) dated 09.03.2020 had notified the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Rules, 2020. In the Hindi version of said Rules, in clause-13, page-9, the words
“  , 2012” may be read as “  , 2012” and the words “   
  ” in Form-A, page-9, may be read as “      ”.
[F. No. CW-I-30/1/2019-CW-I]
AASTHA SAXENA KHATWANI, Jt. Secy.
1521 GI/2020
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. Digitally signed by MANOJ KUMAR
MANOJ KUMAR VERMA VERMA
Date: 2020.03.19 19:02:11 +05'30'

